Ablation -  A key-hole procedure therapy for atrial fibrillation (AF) and atrial flutter. Ablation is a complex and technically challenging procedure. With ablation, the inner lining/area of the atria showing the highest excitability is first identified (i.e. by a process called mapping, which takes the bulk of the procedural time) and then destroyed using focused energy (hot-radiofrequency ablation or cold-cryoablation). These ‘ablated areas’ heal by ‘scar formation’, which then limits or stops the disorganized chaotic electrical signals from those areas developing into persistent AF again. More specifically, the term ‘pulmonary vein isolation (PVI)’ is when ablation is used to scar the specific area in the left atrium where the pulmonary veins are located. Likewise, ablation of a specific area within the right atrium (the cavo-tricuspid isthmus line) where the atrial flutter circuit is located is called ‘CTI ablation’. Because of the proximity of the both atria and especially the left atrium to the other organs/nerves/vessels in the chest, ablation procedures carry risks of complications such as collection of fluid in the pericardium (pericardial effusion), atrio-pericardial fistula, oesophageal pain/erosion or fistula, Vagus nerve palsy etc. Other less serious complications of ablation include those associated with ‘peripheral access (for the procedure)’ as ablation is carried out whilst maintaining full anti-coagulation (thinning of blood), as well as those associated with ‘sedation’. On average, ablation procedures generally last 2-4 hours, with the longer times associated with the ‘combined AF and flutter ablations.’
ACE inhibitor (ACEI) -  Such as ramipril, are a group of drugs that inhibit the action of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) and are used in the treatment of heart failure.
Amitriptyline -  An anti-depressant drug used to manage low mood/depression. It is also used for some types of chronic pains.
Amlodipine -  A selective calcium channel blocker with mainly vascular effects, used in the treatment of hypertension.
Angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) -  Such as valsartan, irbesartan, candesartan are a group of drugs that block the action of angiotensin II and are used primarily in the treatment of heart failure. They can be used in place of ACEI, such as ramipril, when the ACEIs are associated with side effects such as a dry cough.
Anti-platelet drugs -  Such as aspirin and clopidogrel, are blood thinners that make the blood to become less likely to develop into blood clots.
Anxiety -  A feeling of unease, such as worry or fear that can be mild or severe. Anxiety can lead to panic attacks - a type of fear response. No one knows exactly what causes anxiety problems, but there probably lots of factors involved. Problems in one’s life can trigger an onset of anxiety e.g. any form of stress such as physical or emotional abuse, unemployment, homelessness, losing someone close etc.  It often co-exists with depression.
Aorta -  This is the largest blood vessel in the body. It exits the heart where the aortic valve and the opening to the coronary arteries are located.  It then becomes the ascending aorta, the aortic arch and then the descending aorta.
Aortic aneurysm (dilatation) -  The enlargement of the aorta greater than 1.5 times its normal size. Aortic aneurysm usually does not cause any symptoms but after it grows to a certain size, it carries the risk of ‘sudden rupture’ which can be life threatening. A limited tear in the wall of the aorta is called aortic dissection (see below).
Aortic dissection -  A tear in the inner lining of the aorta. With very high blood pressures (hypertension), the aorta can develop a tear spontaneously, which can lead to a total rupture of the aorta causing immediate fatality. An aortic dissection is classified as Type A if it occurs in the ascending portion of the aorta, or Type B if it occurs in the descending portion of the aorta. Type A dissection can also involve the aortic root extending back to the aortic valve (resulting in aortic regurgitation and pericardial effusion - collection of fluid/blood in the sac surrounding the heart) or extend forward into the aortic arch.  Such extensive dissections involving the aortic valve, root, ascending aorta and aortic arch need “Aortic root and Ascending Aorta with hemi-arch with Aortic Valve Replacement (AVR)”.
Aortic regurgitation (AR) -  Describes a leaking of the aortic valve in which blood travels in the opposite direction of normal flow, from the aorta back into the heart.  AR can develop following aortic root dilatation, aortic dissection or infective endocarditis (IE). AR can be mild, moderate or severe.
Aortic root -  The aortic root consists of the aorta between the aortic valve and openings for the coronary arteries (the coronary ostia).
Aortic valve (AV) -  The valve lying between the left ventricle and aorta, allowing the flow of blood to the whole body. The normal AV is tri-leaflet with thin supple leaflets.
Aortic valve replacement (AVR) -  A type of open-heart surgery used to treat problems with the heart's aortic valve. The aortic valve controls the flow of blood from the heart to the rest of the body.  AVR operation involves removing the faulty or damaged native valve and replacing it with a new artificial valve; these new valves could be metallic/mechanical or tissue/biological valves. Mechanical valves can be of 2 designs; tilting disc or bi-leaflet. Biological valves can be homograft valves (taken from a deceased human donor) or heterograft (taken from pig or cow). AVR operation could involve replacing the valve alone or replacing the aortic valve along with its adjoining length of aortic root (called root plus valve replacement).
Atrial fibrillation (AF) -  AF is the most common cardiac arrhythmia that arises in the upper chambers (atria) of the heart. In AF, the electrical impulses fire off in a disorganised way from different places in the atria. This causes the atria to twitch (rather than contract to push blood forward) and is felt as an irregular heartbeat or pulse. Although AF can be asymptomatic (un-noticed by the patient), common symptoms can include palpitations, tiredness, shortness of breath, dizziness/feeling faint. AF increases the risk of stroke. AF can be continuous/persistent or paroxysmal/intermittent (i.e. comes and goes). The treatment includes beta-blockers, anti-arrhythmic drugs, electrical cardioversion (shock delivered to the chest wall) and procedures such as ablation. AF also mandates that blood thinners (anti-coagulants) are needed to reduce the risks of strokes.
Atrial flutter -  Atrial flutter is a more ‘organised’ excitation of the atria and although it is less common than AF, it causes the same symptoms as AF or even be un-noticed (asymptomatic). Atrial flutter can often co-exist with AF (i.e. about a third of patients with AF also have atrial flutter) and complications of atrial flutter are also similar to AF. Treatment is similar to AF, including ablation procedure. Atrial flutter most commonly occurs in a ‘re-entrant electrical circuit’ around/near the tricuspid valve in the right atria.
Beta-blocker -  Such as bisoprolol describes a group of drugs that inhibit the stimulation of beta-adrenergic receptors in the sympathetic nervous system and are used in the treatment of arrhythmias (abnormal heart rhythms), angina (chest pain) and hypertension.
Bipolar disorder - Co-existing depression and anxiety, often in severe forms of both. 
Body mass index (BMI) -  A reproducible way to represent/measure weight per body surface area and therefore obesity.  A normal/healthy BMI is between 19-24.9;  overweight between 25-29.9; and obesity >30.
Bronchoscopy -  A test to look at the inside of the breathing tubes (airways) of the lungs and take samples (biopsies) for further tests. A narrow, flexible tube called a bronchoscope is guided down the windpipe (trachea) and into the smaller airways.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) -  A long-term condition where the kidneys do not work effectively. CKD does not usually cause symptoms until it reaches an advanced stage. In many cases, it is only identified through a routine blood or urine test which indicate that the kidneys may not be working normally. Symptoms of advanced CKD may include tiredness/fatigue/weakness, nausea, poor appetite, vomiting, sleep problems, decreased alertness/mental sharpness and changes in the amount of urination. Ankles and feet may become swollen due to water retention. Causes include diabetes (most common cause), essential hypertension (second most common cause), autoimmune diseases (e.g. lupus and IgA nephropathy), genetic diseases (polycystic kidneys), nephrotic syndrome and urinary tract problems (enlarged prostrate, kidney stones etc.). The main test for kidney disease is a blood test that is used to work out how well the kidneys are working. The test measures the levels of a waste product called creatinine in the blood, and then uses a calculation that takes into account the age, gender and ethnic group to work out how many millilitres of waste the kidneys are able to filter in a minute.  This measurement is known as estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR).  Healthy kidneys should be able to filter more than 90ml/min and lower values indicate presence of kidney disease. The 5 stages of CKD are based on eGFR results -  stage 1 - eGFR above 90ml/min but other tests have detected signs of kidney damage; stage 2 - a slightly reduced eGFR 60-89ml/min; stage 3a - eGFR of 45-59ml/min; stage 3b - eGFR of 30-44ml/min; stage 4 - eGFR of 15-29ml/min; stage 5 – eGFR below 15ml/min (i.e. the kidneys have lost almost all of their function). There is no cure for CKD, and treatment is mainly supportive depending on the stage of disease. This can include lifestyle changes to ensure you remain as healthy as possible; medication to control associated problems such as hypertension, high cholesterol and diabetes mellitus; dialysis treatment to replicate some of the kidney's functions (for stage 5); and kidney transplant (for stage 5).
Chronic obstructive airway disease (COPD)/chronic asthma -  A common lung disease that occurs when the lungs become inflamed/damaged and the airways narrowed; the damage to the lungs caused by COPD is permanent. COPD includes a combination of emphysema (damage to the air sacs of the lungs) and chronic bronchitis (long-term inflammation/spasm of the airways). The main symptoms of COPD are increasing shortness of breath/breathlessness, a persistent chesty cough (with phlegm/secretions), persistent wheezing, chest tightness and frequent chest infections, and persistent wheezing.  Without treatment, the symptoms usually slowly get worse, with intermittent sudden flare-up/worsening or exacerbation. The main cause is smoking with the risk being higher the longer one has smoked, although the condition can sometimes affect people who have never smoked with such cases due to long-term exposure to harmful fumes/dust or genetic tendencies that mean the lungs are more vulnerable to damage.  Diagnosis is made by a high suspicion based on smoking history, changes on chest X-ray, peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR), blood oxygen saturation measurements and spirometry/lung function test (LFT).  With proper management, most people with COPD can achieve good symptom control and quality of life. Treatment includes stopping smoking, using inhalers/nebulisers and pulmonary rehabilitation (specialised programme of exercise and education). People with COPD are at increased risk of developing heart disease including heart attack, pulmonary hypertension, lung cancer, colds, flu, recurrent pneumonia/chest infections, and even depression.
Colchicine -  A medication used to treat attacks of gout (flares). It works by decreasing swelling and lessening the build-up of uric acid crystals that cause pain in the affected joint(s).
Computerised tomography (CT) scan -  Describes the production of computer-processed cross-sectional X-ray images of the human body.
Coronary angiogram -  A specialised X-ray for examining the arteries of the heart (coronary arteries), which requires a key-hole procedure to insert small tubes up to the beginning of each coronary artery with injection of small amounts of contract (radio-opaque) fluid.
Coronary artery by-pass graft (CABG) surgery - Major open-heart surgery procedure using channels (patient’s own other arteries or veins) to by-pass the blood flow from the aorta (main artery of the body) towards the coronary artery below the site of blockage within that coronary artery.
CT coronary angiogram (CTCA) -  A test to take images of blood vessels using contrast agents injected into the bloodstream whilst using a CT scan. It is a non-invasive test (unlike a coronary angiogram), and is used as a screening test for chest pain.
Depression -  A common but complex mental health problem that causes people to experience low mood, loss of interest or pleasure, feelings of guilt or low self-worth, disturbed sleep or appetite, low energy and poor concentration. These symptoms can vary in severity from mild to severe. Causes of depression are not fully understood. Contributing factors leading to depression include biological factors (genetics or experience of physical illness or injury etc.), psychological or social factors (unemployment, bereavement, homelessness etc.) and long-standing illness (back pain, cancer, heart disease etc.). Treatment is usually in the form of medication (antidepressants) and/or psychotherapy (cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and counselling).
Diabetes mellitus (DM) -  A disease that prevents the body from properly using the energy from the food we eat. When we eat or drink, much of the food is broken down into a simple sugar called glucose. Glucose provides the energy our body needs for daily activities. However, glucose cannot enter the body’s cells by itself. The pancreas (an organ located behind the stomach) produces and releases insulin into the blood, which serves as the helper that lets glucose into the cells for use as energy. If the pancreas produces either little or no insulin, it leads to the build-up of glucose in the blood. The presence of too much glucose in the blood is called hyperglycaemia or diabetes.  Diabetes is caused by a combination of hereditary and environmental factors (family history of diabetes, being overweight, hypertension, smoking, high cholesterol, autoimmune disease etc.) and through the use of certain medications (steroids etc.).  Diabetes increases the risk of heart attacks, high cholesterol, stroke and PVD. Diabetes is diagnosed with a simple blood test to measure the level of glucose, with normal levels being -  <7mmol/dl. An alternate test that represents longer-term average of blood glucose levels/control of DM is called glycated haemoglobin or Hb1Ac.
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) - Describes a disease of the heart muscle resulting in enlargement/dilation with weakness of the heart muscle and leading to development of heart failure. There are many causes of DCM; genetic, toxins (alcohol, chemotherapy etc), viral infections that affect the heart (myocarditis), pregnancy, auto-immune conditions etc. Often no cause is identified, and it is referred to as idiopathic.
Diuretics -  Such as frusemide are types of diuretics; a drug that relieves fluid retention (oedema) occurring in heart, kidney and liver failure by increasing urination (diuresis). 
Doppler scan -  Ultrasound examination of the peripheral arteries or veins.
Echocardiogram/transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) -  Describes the use of ultrasound waves to produce real-time images of the heart. The examination is carried out with the ultrasound probe placed on the front of the chest (over the heart area) to identify the anatomy/structure and function of the heart whilst the patient is awake and lying on a consulting couch.
Ejection fraction -  Describes the percentage of blood that is pumped out of the left 
chamber of the heart with each heartbeat.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) -  Describes a tracing of the electrical activity of the heart, to diagnose heart conditions such as myocardial infarction (heart attack) or arrhythmias (changes in heart rhythm).
Electroencephalogram (EEG) -  Describes a tracing of the electrical activity of the brain.
Epididymo-orchitis -  A condition characterised by pain and swelling in the scrotum. It is caused by infection and inflammation in the epididymis and/or testicle.
Epilepsy/fit -  Describes a disorder of brain activity characterised as a single seizure of sudden onset. It is also called epilepsy.
Erectile dysfunction (ED) -  Also known as impotence. The inability to get and maintain an erection. It is a very common condition, usually due to stress, tiredness, anxiety or excess alcohol. It is estimated that half of all men between the ages of 40 and 70 will have it to some degree.
Essential hypertension (HT) -  High blood pressure that does not have a known identifiable cause. HT is commonly linked to genetic tendencies (i.e. family history), poor diet, lack of exercise, and obesity. It is by far the most common form of HT, affecting the majority (nearly 90%) of those who experience high blood pressure.
FBC (full blood count) -  A blood test that includes checking the levels of haemoglobin (to look for anaemia), white blood cell count (cells that fight infection) and platelets (cells that help to stop bleeding). 
Gastroscopy -  Describes the insertion of a tube into the food passage (oesophagus) and then into the stomach to carry out examination of the inner lining of the stomach.
Gout -  Caused by a build-up of a uric acid in the blood. If the body produce too much uric acid or the kidneys stop filtering enough out, it can build up and cause tiny sharp crystals to form in and around various joints. These crystals can cause the joint to become inflamed (red and swollen) and painful.
Haematoma -  A localized collection of blood/leakage of blood outside of the vessel. It is often described as a ‘swelling’ and can be associated with bruising (which is due to seepage of blood close to the skin surface). Haematoma is reported to occur in 10% of cases immediately after an EP procedure, with 27% cases developing further haematoma up to 14-days post-procedure. More importantly, any hematoma presenting immediately after procedure was also more likely to be associated with patient-reported hematomas up to 14 days.
Heart failure (HF) -  Normally the left ventricle (one of the heart’s four chambers), pumps blood into the aorta (the large artery leaving the heart) and around the body.  With heart failure (HF), the heart muscle becomes weak with decreased ability to function i.e. it is unable to pump enough blood around the body. HF therefore describes a collection of symptoms resulting from the heart’s inability to pump blood as effectively as it should. Therefore, HF results in retention and build up of fluids in the lungs (pulmonary oedema or left heart/ventricular failure) and extremities (legs/abdominal oedema or right heart failure). When signs of both left and right HF coexist, it is called congestive cardiac failure. Typically, HF causes non-specific symptoms (such as tiredness, loss of appeitte, being unwell) as well as specific symptoms such as shortness of breath/breathlessness at rest or during activities, difficulty in lying flat, cough and leg swellings. HF treatment includes supportive medicines as well as treating the specific underlying cause.  For example, if HF is due to valve disease, then a valve operation would be indicated, or if HF is due to ischamemic heart disease then revascularisation such as a coronary artery by-pass graft (CABG) or percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) would be indiacted, as necessary.  Heart transplantation could be considered for terminal or end-stage HF if appropriate.
Heparin -  This is an anticoagulant (blood thinner) that can be given into the vein to thin the blood quickly. Heparin starts thinning blood within a few minutes, is short acting (lasting about 1-2 hours only), and the level of thinning of the blood due to heparin can be monitored using a quick blood test called ‘ACT’ (activated clotting time). This test measures the number of seconds it takes for a blood clot to form -  70 to 120 seconds is the usual amount of time for blood to clot (i.e. normally, without any heparin). The desired or therapeutic ACT for cardiac procedures such as an ablation, where heparin is used, is usually between 250-350 (i.e. 2 - 2.5 times normal). The blood thinning effects of Heparin can be reversed by using a medicine called Protamine.
Hypertension (HT) -  Abnormally high blood pressure.
Impaired glucose tolerance test (GTT) -  The blood glucose level is raised beyond normal, after a glucose challenge, but not high enough to warrant a diagnosis of diabetes.  It is considered pre-diabetes status and is diagnosed on blood test.
Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) - Most arrhythmias result from problems in the electrical system of the heart. If the arrhythmia is to arise from the ventricles (lower chambers of the heart) and it is serious, an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) is implanted. ICDs are implanted in the chest. ICDs can have a single wire or lead in the heart (in the right ventricle and called single chamber ICD), two leads (in the right atrium and right ventricle called dual chamber ICD) or three leads (called biventricular ICD with one wire in the right atrium, one in the right ventricle and one on the outer wall of the left Ventricle). ICDs terminate ventricular tachycardia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF) with high efficacy and can protect patients from sudden cardiac death (SCD).
Infective endocarditis (IE) -  Infection or inflammation of the endocardium (inner lining of the heart muscle) especially at/around the valves of the heart, usually involving bacteria (commonly streptococci or staphylococci type bacteria).
Inferior-septal myocardial infarction (MI) - A heart attack due to blocked artery causing damage to specific part (lying just above the stomach) of the heart muscle.
Insulin -  A hormone produced in the pancreas to regulate the use of sugars (in the form of glucose) by the body i.e. provides the energy used by the body.  Glucose is derived from carbohydrates in eaten food. Insulin helps to prevent the blood levels of glucose becoming too high (hyperglycaemia) or too low (hypoglycaemia). In diabetes mellitus, the levels of insulin become low or the insulin becomes inefficient, leading to lower use of glucose by the body. Diabetes mellitus is identified by a simple blood test that shows the build-up of glucose in the blood (above normal levels).
Ischaemic cardiomyopathy -  Describes a disease of the heart muscle resulting in enlargement/dilation with weakness of the heart muscle and leading to development of heart failure. Ischemic cardiomyopathy is primarily due to a combination of repeated ischemic injuries (MI/heart attack) and chronic lack of blood flow to the heart muscle making it to become weak.  Ischaemic heart disease therefore commonly causes ischaemic cardiomyopathy due to the same risk modifiable and non-modifiable factors.
Ischaemic heart disease (IHD) -  Describes the impairment of heart function due to a lack of blood flow to the heart muscle. Gradual progressive build-up of fatty material within the wall of the coronary arteries, called atherosclerosis, leads to the gradual narrowing of the arteries or blockages.  Such narrowed or blocked arteries therefore allow less blood and oxygen to be delivered to the heart muscle. Risk factors for ischaemic heart disease can be modifiable (diabetes mellitus, hypertension, tobacco abuse, hyperlipidaemia, obesity, sedentary lifestyle etc.) and non-modifiable (age, male gender, family predisposition etc.).
Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) -  Describes the percentage of blood ejected from the left ventricle of the heart with each heartbeat. 
Left ventricular ejection fraction/ejection fraction (LVEF/EF) -  Describes the percentage of blood ejected from the left ventricle of the heart with each heartbeat using TTE. Normal LVEF/EF is > 60%, which means that 60% of the blood volume present within the heart chamber (the left ventricle) is ejected with each heartbeat.
Lercanidipine -  A calcium-channel blocker drug to lower blood pressure.
Levetiracetam -  A drug used to treat epilepsy.
Metformin MR -  An anti-diabetic medication.
Mineralocorticoid -  Such as spironolactone describes a group of drugs that block the aldosterone pathway. These are therefore mild diuretics, but their advantage is in preventing/slowing the development of scarring in the heart muscle.
Monomil XL -  An anti-anginal medicine used to stabilize symptoms in IHD.
Myocardial infarction (MI) -  Describes a reduction in the blood supply to an area of heart muscle due to ischaemia. MI can commonly be caused by thrombus and embolus and can result in the death of the tissue. This most frequently involves the left heart, which is the muscular component of the heart responsible for generating high arterial pressures to pump blood to the extremities. MI is the most frequent cause of death throughout the Western World, particularly in men. The most frequent cause is thrombosis due to atherosclerosis of the coronary arteries, the arteries that supply the heart, or embolism from atherosclerotic disease. MIs impair the muscle function of the heart, and occasionally they cause an arrhythmia, which may be fatal. MI is also known as “a coronary” or “a heart attack”.
Nebuliser -  A machine that helps one to breathe in a medicine (e.g. Salbutamol) as a mist through a mask or a mouthpiece and is the preferred method in patients with lung diseases such as asthma, COPD, bronchiectasis, cystic fibrosis etc. The nebuliser uses oxygen, compressed air or ultrasonic power to convert the solution of a drug into a fine spray (mist), which is then inhaled into the lungs. The inhaled medication works quickly to clear the airways, relieve symptoms (wheezing, breathlessness and chest tightness) and prevent flare-ups.
Novel oral anti-coagulant (NOAC) -  Blood coagulation is inhibited by the use of medicines called anti-coagulants (blood thinning medicines) such as Warfarin. In patients with AF, Warfarin thins the blood sufficiently to reduce the risks of blood clotting within the heart chambers, which in turn reduces the risk of developing stroke. Warfarin however requires close and frequent monitoring (with a blood test called INR) to achieve the correct level of blood thinning. NOACs are new class of medicines that achieve the same level of thinning of blood as Warfarin but one that is reliable and with less need for monitoring i.e. no need for INR tests. Use of NOACs is therefore preferred over warfarin. Warfarin effects can be reversed by administration of Vitamin K.
Oxygen saturation test -  A measure of the level of oxygen in the blood (measured by a device attached to the finger/over the fingernail).
Paliperidone -  An atypical antipsychotic medicine.
Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) -  A simple breathing test that measures how fast/quickly one can breathe out all the air in the lungs. 
Peripheral vascular disease (PVD) -  A condition where the arteries outside of the heart and brain become narrowed or blocked due to atherosclerosis (build-up of fatty deposits). This can happen in arteries of the legs, typically causing pain and fatigue, especially during exercise improving on rest. Typical risk factors include smoking, hypertension, high cholesterol, diabetes, overweight/obesity, a sedentary lifestyle, having a family history, increasing age (over 50 years) etc.
Pleurisy -  A condition in which the pleura — a membrane consisting of a layer of tissue that lines the inner side of the chest cavity and a layer of tissue that surrounds the lungs — becomes inflamed. Also called pleuritis, pleurisy causes sharp chest pain (pleuritic pain) that worsens during breathing.
Pneumonia/chest infection -  Describes the infection and inflammation of the air sacs/tissue of the lung, resulting in the accumulation of infectious fluid in the lungs.
Promethazine -  An anti-histamine used to treat nausea and vomiting.
Pulmonary embolism (PE) -  The presence of a blood clot in the arteries of the lungs. It occurs when a clump of material, most often a blood clot, gets wedged into the artery of the lung. These blood clots most commonly come from the deep veins of the legs. This condition is known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). People at risk for PE are those who have been inactive or immobile for long periods of time, such as after an operation, and those who have certain inherited conditions, such as blood clotting disorders.  The treatment is to thin the blood with Warfarin/NOAC.
QRISK2 -  An algorithm for predicting cardiovascular risk. It estimates the risk of a person developing cardiovascular disease (CVD) over the next 10 years and can be applied to those aged between 35 and 74 years. QRISK2 is an online assessment tool used in people who do not already have heart disease. QRISK is UK-specific and takes into account many of the traditional risk factors for CVD (age, sex, cholesterol-high density lipoprotein ratio, blood pressure, diabetes, smoking status etc.) and includes additional risk factors (ethnicity, deprivation (measured using the Townsend deprivation score, which is obtained from data associated with a person’s postcode), blood pressure treatment, body mass index etc.). A person's 10-year risk of CVD can be used to inform treatment decisions (lifestyle advice or drug treatment). If the risk score was calculated to be more than 15%, you are thought to be at high risk of getting heart, stroke or blood vessel disease (CVD) in the next five years. If your risk score is less than 10%, you are thought to be at low risk of CVD in the next 10 years.
Ranolazine -  An anti-anginal medicine used to stabilize symptoms in IHD.
Renal cancer/renal cell carcinoma (RCC) -  RCC is most commonly found in men between the ages of 50 and 70. Risk factors include hypertension, obesity, smoking, family history of RCC, dialysis treatment, genetic conditions (polycystic kidneys) etc.  Treatment includes surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, immunotherapy etc. If the cancer has spread to other organs, the survival rate is much lower than if it is caught before spreading. Even after the cancer is treated, the long-term effects of the disease, which can include poor kidney function, may still occur.

Risperidone -  An antipsychotic drug.

Sertraline -  An antidepressant medication.

Schizophrenia -  A mental illness characterised by abnormal behaviour and a decreased ability to understand reality. Other symptoms may include false beliefs, unclear or confused thinking, hearing voices that do not exist, reduced social engagement and emotional expression, and lack of motivation.

Sheath -  A small tube (about 6-11 cm in length) made of soft plastic that has a haemostatic valve at its top end to stop the back flow of blood. It is inserted into a peripheral artery or vein to allow easy and repeated access to that vessel without any discomfort or leakage of blood. Once in place, the sheath allows key-hole diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, such as AF ablation and coronary angiogram to be carried out. The sheath is therefore left in place for the duration of the procedure and also protects the vessel from trauma/damage whilst also keeping the vessel open. Sheaths come in various diameters represented as French or F size (internationally agreed gauge system). Smallest diameter size is 4F (1.35mm), 6F has a 2mm diameter, 7F = 2.3mm diameter and 8F has a diameter of 2.7mm. Possible complications include (but are not limited to) -  air embolism, intimal tear, hematoma at the puncture site, perforation of the vessel wall, thrombus formation and infection. Haemostasis following removal of sheaths placed in an artery can be achieved with deployment of a ‘plug’ to seal the hole in the artery, but such devices/plugs are not licenced for use in a vein. Haemostasis following removal of sheaths placed in a vein, such as ablation procedure, therefore is achieved by manual compression only.
Sotalol -  Although a weak beta-blocker, it is used specifically as an anti-arrhythmic i.e. abnormalities of heart rhythm.
Spirometry/lung function test (LFT) -  Describes a diagnostic test used to assess the function of lungs and response to treatments (such as inhalers). LFT assesses how well the lungs are working by blowing/breathing into a machine called spirometer. This makes two measurements, including the volume of air blown out in one second (FEV1 or Forced Expiratory Volume in 1 second), and the total amount of air blown out (FVC or Forced Vital Capacity). The readings are then compared with normal average results for that age group.
Statin -  Such as simvastatin, atorvastatin and pravastatin are used to lower the level of cholesterol in the blood and aiming to reduce its build up in the blood vessels, thereby aiming to slowing progression of ischaemic heart disease in the longer term.
Tadalafil -  Brand name Cialis®, is a medication used to treat erectile dysfunction and sometimes other conditions such as benign prostatic hyperplasia and pulmonary arterial hypertension.
Troponin level -  Describes the levels of a protein found in heart muscle. Measurements of the levels of this protein in the blood are used as a screening test to detect heart attack/MI.
Urea and electrolytes (U+E) -  A group of blood tests used as markers of kidney function that measure the levels of creatinine, blood urea nitrogen and electrolytes (sodium and potassium) in the blood. 
Warfarin -  Blood coagulation is inhibited by the use of medicines called anti-coagulants (blood thinning medicines) such as Warfarin. Warfarin thins the blood sufficiently to reduce the risk of blood clotting within the heart chambers, which in turn reduces the risk of developing stroke. Warfarin, however, requires close and frequent monitoring (with a blood test called INR) to achieve the correct level of blood thinning. Warfarin’s effects can be reversed by administration of Vitamin K.
Arthroscopy -  Also called arthroscopic or keyhole surgery, is a minimally invasive surgical procedure on a joint in which an examination, and sometimes treatment of damage, is performed using an arthroscope. An arthroscope is an endoscope that is inserted into the joint through a small incision.
Cardiothoracic -  Also known as thoracic surgery, is the field of medicine involved in surgical treatment of organs inside the thorax (the chest). This generally includes treatment of conditions of the heart (heart disease) and lungs (lung disease).
Cystotomy -  The general term for the surgical creation of an opening into the bladder. It may be a planned component of urologic surgery or an iatrogenic occurrence.
Gastro-oesophageal -  The gastro-oesophageal junction is in between the oesophagus and the stomach.
Gastroscopy -  A procedure in which a thin, flexible tube called an endoscope is used to look inside the oesophagus (gullet), stomach and the first part of the small intestine (duodenum). It is also sometimes referred to as an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. The endoscope has a light and a camera at one end.
Hydronephrosis -  The swelling of a kidney due to a build-up of urine. It happens when urine cannot drain out from the kidney to the bladder due to a blockage or obstruction. 
Incisional hernia -  A hernia that occurs through a previously made incision in the abdominal wall. For example, the scar left from a previous surgical operation.
Interspinous -  The interspinous ligaments, also known as interspinal ligaments, are thin and membranous ligaments that connect adjoining spinous processes of the vertebra in the spine.
Irritable bowel syndrome -  A common disorder that affects the large intestine. Signs and symptoms include cramping, abdominal pain, bloating, gas, and diarrhoea or constipation, or both. Some people can control their symptoms by managing their diet, lifestyle and stress.
Jewitt brace -  Designed to give support to the thoracic and lumbar spine by preventing twisting and flexion.
Lumbar hernia -  A protrusion of either extraperitoneal fat or intraperitoneal contents through either of the lumbar triangles. 
Nephrostomy tube -  A thin, plastic tube (catheter) that is inserted through the skin on your back and into your kidney. Some people may need a catheter into each kidney. The nephrostomy drains urine from one or both kidneys into a collecting bag outside your body.
Pelviureteric junction -  A junction located where the pelvis of the kidney meets the ureter (the tube that drains urine into the bladder). 
Percutaneous drainage -  Uses imaging guidance to place a needle or catheter through the skin into the abscess to remove or drain the infected fluid. It offers faster recovery than open surgical drainage.
Pneumothorax -  A collapsed lung. A pneumothorax occurs when air leaks into the space between your lung and chest wall. This air pushes on the outside of your lung and causes it to collapse.
Pulmonary angiogram -  An angiogram of the blood vessels of the lungs. The procedure is done with a special contrast dye injected into the body's blood vessels. This is done in the groin or arm. The dye shows up on X-rays.
Stratice type mesh -  Biological mesh used where infection is present within the surgical wound.
Supraspinatus -  A relatively small muscle of the upper back that runs from the supraspinatus fossa superior portion of the scapula (shoulder blade) to the greater tubercle of the humerus. It is one of the four rotator cuff muscles and also abducts the arm at the shoulder.
Ureter -  Tubes made of smooth muscle fibres that propel urine from the kidneys to the urinary bladder.
Abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) -  This is the term used to describe any symptomatic variation from normal menstruation in terms of regularity, frequency, volume, or duration. 
Acceleration of labour -  The speeding up of labour by the use of drugs, usually via a Syntocinon drip.
Active labour -   Also known as the first stage of labour.  This is the period after the latent (early) stage of labour when a woman is experiencing strong, regular contractions and her cervix continues to dilate from 4cms until she is fully dilated (10cms).
Adenomyosis -  This is a condition that is thought to affect about 10% of women of reproductive age in the UK. It occurs when cells of the inner womb lining (endometrium) are found in the outer muscle layer of the womb (myometrium). It is associated with heavy and painful periods.
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) -  Is an enzyme found throughout the body, but it is mainly found in the liver, bones, kidneys, and digestive system. When the liver is damaged, ALP may leak into the bloodstream. High levels of ALP can indicate liver disease or bone disorders.
Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) -  A substance present in the blood of pregnant women. This is tested as part of the Down’s syndrome screening tests. You may need further tests if your levels appear higher or lower than normal.
Albumin (ALB) -  This is a protein. If it is present in your urine, it may be a sign of pre-eclampsia or of an infection such as cystitis.
Amniotic fluid -  Sometimes called liquor, this is the fluid that surrounds the baby in the uterus (womb).
Anaemia -  A condition in which there is a deficiency of red cells or of haemoglobin (Hb) in the blood, resulting in pallor and weariness.
Amniotic sac -  The bag in which the fetus and amniotic fluid are contained during pregnancy.
Antenatal -  Before the birth.
Apgar score -  An Apgar is a quick test performed at 1 minute and 5 minutes after birth. The 1 minute score determines how well the baby tolerated the birthing process. The 5-minute score assesses how well the newborn is adapting to their new environment. The rating is based on a total score of 1 to 10, with 10 suggesting the healthiest infant.
Artificial rupture of membranes (ARM) -  If the neck of your womb (the cervix) is slightly open because you have had some contractions, it is possible to use a long hook to nick the bag of waters where they bulge down in front of your baby’s head. Breaking the waters in this way may stimulate the onset of strong labour.
Antepartum haemorrhage (APH) -  Bleeding before the birth.
Assisted delivery -  The use forceps or ventouse to speed up the delivery, or to move the baby if they have become stuck.
Body mass index (BMI) -  A measure of body fat that uses height and weight. BMI calculation divides an adult's weight in kilograms by their height in metres squared. The higher the BMI, the more risk of significant disease. A BMI of under 24 is healthy.
Breech presentation (BR) -  This means your baby is lying bottom or feet down in the uterus.
Blood pressure (BP) -  It’s important to have your blood pressure measured as a rise could mean a problem.
Caesarean section (CS) -  A surgical procedure used to deliver a baby through incisions in the abdomen and uterus.
Cephalic (Ceph) -  This means the baby is lying with its head in the lower part of the uterus.
Chorionic villi sampling -  A prenatal test that scans for genetic abnormalities.
Congenital -  Present at birth.
C-reactive protein (CRP) -  A non-specific marker of inflammation or infection
Crowning -  The point in labour when the head of the baby can be seen at the vagina.
Diamorphine -  This is an injection like pethidine sometimes given for pain relief in labour.  Like pethidine, it can cause drowsiness and nausea.
Dilation/Dilatation -  In the first stage of labour the cervix, or neck of the womb, gradually opens up to make space for the baby. It needs to open to approximately 10 centimetres before the baby’s head can pass through. This process is called dilation of the cervix.
Doppler -  This is a small handheld machine that picks up your baby’s heartbeat by ultrasound.
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding (DUB) -  A term used to describe any symptomatic variation from normal menstruation in terms of regularity, frequency, volume, or duration when pregnancy, iatrogenic causes, systemic conditions and genital tract pathology are excluded. 
Eclampsia -  A serious complication of pregnancy, characterised by high blood pressure and oedema (swelling), which in its worse form can result in a seizure (fit).  It is the more severe form of pre-eclampsia.
Ectopic Pregnancy -  A pregnancy that develops somewhere other than the uterus, usually in the fallopian tube.  This pregnancy cannot be allowed to continue as it is dangerous.
Endometrial ablation (EA) -  An operation that destroys the endometrium (lining) and the superficial myometrium (muscle) of the uterus as a treatment for heavy menstrual bleeding.
Expected Date of Delivery (EDD) -  The date when your baby is due.  Sometimes called EDC (Expected Date of Confinement).
Engaged (ENG) -  This means that the widest part of the baby’s head has passed into the pelvis in preparation for giving birth.
Entonox -  A mixture of oxygen and nitrous oxide, inhaled through a mask or mouthpiece by the mother during labour for pain relief.  Also called gas and air or gas and oxygen.
Epidural -  An injection of local anaesthetic into the lower back, given for pain relief during labour.  This can be topped up via a catheter (a thin tube) that is left in place during labour.  For most women an epidural takes away all the pain of contractions.
Episiotomy -  A cut made in the mother’s perineum (the area between the vagina and anus) to allow the baby to be born more quickly and prevent tearing.
Fallopian tubes -  Part of the female reproductive system.  The eggs produced in the ovaries have to travel down the fallopian tubes before embedding in the lining of the uterus.  Occasionally a fertilised egg will embed in the tube, causing an ectopic pregnancy.
Fetal blood sampling (FBS) -  This is a test that is sometimes needed on the baby during labour.  If the baby’s heart rate tracing shows a heart rate pattern that is worrying, the doctor may want to check that the baby is coping well with the labour to make sure it is safe to let the labour continue.  It involves taking a tiny amount of blood from the baby’s scalp using a speculum and can reduce unnecessary interventions during labour.
Fetal distress -  Sometimes the strength of labour contractions can reduce the baby’s oxygen supply, causing the baby to become distressed. This is usually indicated by a persistently abnormal heartbeat or an irregular rhythm.
Foetus -  Medical name for the baby before it’s born.
Foetal heart (FH) -  You may see ‘FH heard’ or ‘FHH’ on your notes – that means your baby’s heartbeat has been heard.
Foetal Movement (FM) -  It may say ‘FM felt’ or ‘FMF’ on your notes. That means your baby had been felt to move.
First stage of labour -  The time from the beginning of labour until the cervix is fully dilated to 10cm. The first stage can vary from a few hours to 12 hours or more.
Fontanelles -  The two soft spots on a newborn’s head where the skull bones do not yet meet.
Forceps -  A pair of hollow blades, rather like large salad servers, which are placed either side of the baby’s head to assist with the birth. When this happens, it is known as a forceps delivery.
Fundus -  This is the top of the uterus. The ‘fundal’ height helps assess the growth of the baby and how many weeks pregnant you are. It’s the length in centimetres between the top of the uterus and the pubic bone.
Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) -  GGT is an enzyme found mainly in the liver. If the liver is injured or the flow of bile is obstructed, the concentration of GGT within the bloodstream rises. It can also be raised in association with alcoholism.
Gestation/Gestational age -  How far into the pregnancy you are, measured from the first day of your last menstrual period.
Haematocrit (HCT) -  The volume percentage of red blood cells in the blood. It normally measures between 36 and 44% in women.
Haemoglobin (Hb) -  Haemoglobin is the main component of red blood cells and serves as the transporter for oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood. Low levels are associated with anaemia.
Haemorrhage -  Sudden and severe bleeding. In pregnancy it is usually called antepartum haemorrhage and after the birth it is called postpartum haemorrhage. Any bleeding in pregnancy should be reported to a doctor or midwife. Spotting or slight bleeding is not unusual in early pregnancy and not usually an emergency. Sudden bleeding, especially if accompanied by signs of shock – pale skin, sweating, feeling faint and a weak pulse – all indicate a medical emergency. Call an ambulance and/or doctor straight away.
Hypertension -  High blood pressure.
Hypotension -  Low blood pressure.
Hysterectomy -  The surgical removal of the uterus.
Induction -  Starting the labour artificially.
Ileus -  An ileus results from muscle or nerve problems that stop gut peristalsis (usually temporary) while an obstruction is a physical blockage in the digestive tract.
Ischaemia -  State of inadequate oxygenation of tissues due to under-perfusion of an organ.
Intravenous (IV) -  The administration of fluids or drugs directly into a patient’s venous circulation.
Ketones -  These are substances found in the blood which show that the body has used up all the available carbohydrate for energy and has begun to utilise protein instead. Often a woman in labour with ketones in her blood will feel shaky and weak, and labour can slow down. Eating little and often in early labour can help prevent this happening. Some hospitals put up a drip if a blood test shows that ketones are present.
Last Menstrual Period (LMP) -  This date is used to work out how many weeks pregnant you are. the count starts from the first day of your LMP.
Latent phase of labour -  Also known as early labour. This is when a woman starts to experience contractions, which which can be irregular in strength and frequency and can last from a few hours to several days.  Some women will also experience backache.  The contractions will, over a period of time, usually increase in strength and frequency until they cause your cervix (the neck of the womb) to dilate.  Once the cervix is 4cm dilated the labour is said to have become established and the active phase commences.
Lithotomy position -  A position used for assisted deliveries, where the mother lies flat on her back with her legs raised and apart, supported by stirrups.
Lochia -  For a couple of weeks or more after the birth the woman loses a mixture of blood and mucus through the vagina, like a very heavy period at first but lessening over time. It generally begins as a bright red discharge and gradually turns a brownish colour. Some women find it becomes bright red again if they are too active too soon.
Meconium -  The bowel contents of the baby at birth.
Membrane sweep -  A traditional method of trying to nudge the body into labour when overdue. The doctor or midwife does an internal examination and attempts to stretch the cervix and sweep a finger around the membranes. Sometimes this is enough to get labour going if the cervix is ripe.
Menorrhagia -  Heavy menstrual bleeding, which may negatively affect the woman's physical, social, emotional and/or material quality of life. 

Mirena -  This is a hormonal intrauterine device that releases a synthetic progestogen to prevent an egg implanting. It is a long-term reversible contraceptive that can also be used to treat a range of gynaecological conditions.
Miscarriage -  Spontaneous ending of a pregnancy before 24 weeks’ gestation.
Multigravida -  A woman who has been pregnant before.
Multipara -  Also called a multip – a woman who has given birth at least once before.
NAD -  Nothing Abnormal Detected. The doctor or midwife may write this on your notes when they find no problems.
Neonate -  A newborn infant.
Neonatologist -  A doctor who specialises in the care of newborn babies.
National Early Warning Score (NEWS) -  A tool developed by the Royal College of Physicians which improves the detection and response to clinical deterioration in adult patients and is a key element of patient safety and improving patient outcomes.
Occipito Anterior -  When the back of your baby’s head is toward your front. You may see LOA or ROA on your notes which means Left (or Right) occipito anterior and described whether the baby’s head is toward the left or the right. LOA is usually the best position for a shorter labour and an easier birth.
Occipito Posterior -  As above but the baby’s head is toward your back.
Oedema -  Means swelling. Fluid retention can cause swelling in your ankles, fingers and elsewhere. You may see it measured in your notes as + or ++.
Oral contraceptive pill (OCP) -  Usually just called "the pill". It contains artificial versions of both female gonadal hormones’ oestrogen and progesterone. It suppresses ovulation and can be used as contraception, or to treat a range of gynaecological conditions.
Oxytocin -  The hormone secreted by women when they are in labour which stimulates labour contractions. The same hormone also stimulates milk flow from the breasts by contracting the muscle fibres in the milk ducts.
Paediatrician -  A doctor who specialises in the care of children.
Palpation -  When the midwife of doctor feels the baby by moving their hands across your abdomen.
Patient controlled analgesia (PCA) -  A means of delivering pain relief intravenously via a pump that can be controlled by the patient
Pelvic floor -  The sling of muscles that holds the pelvic organs in place.
Perineum -  The area of skin between your vagina and anus.
Perineal block -  A local anaesthetic given before an episiotomy is carried out.
Pessary -  A special type of medication designed to be inserted into the vagina. In labour, prostaglandin pessaries are sometimes used to induce labour.
Pethidine -  A form of pain relief given by injection into the thigh or bottom. Pethidine usually makes women in labour sleepy and very relaxed. It can make the baby slow to breathe when they are born, in which case they may need an antidote.
Placenta -  The organ that develops in the uterus during pregnancy to transfer nourishment and oxygen to the baby from the mother’s system, and to take away the baby’s waste matter.
Placental abruption -  Premature separation of the placenta from the uterine wall.
Placenta Praevia -  When the placenta is low down. Sometimes it covers the cervix and blocks the baby’s exit, in which case you would need a Caesarean section.
Polyhydramnios -  An excessive amount of amniotic fluid.
Position -  How the baby is lying, for example to the right or left of the pelvis.
Postnatal -  After the birth. Relates to the 28 day period following giving birth.
Postpartum -  Relating to the period of a few days after the birth.
Pre-eclampsia -  This is a complication of pregnancy where the blood pressure increases and protein appears in the urine.
Pregnancy Induced Hypertension (PIH) -  This means that your blood pressure is high a result of the pregnancy.
Presentation -  The part of the baby which is coming first (usually the crown or back of the baby’s head).
Preterm -  Born before 37 weeks of pregnancy.
Primigravida -  A woman pregnant for the first time.
Primipara -  Sometimes called the prim or primip – a woman giving birth for the first time.
Prolapsed umbilical cord -  Usually the baby’s cord is born along with the baby and it continues to supply oxygen to the baby until it is clamped and cut. Occasionally the cord slips down in front of the baby and the oxygen supply to the baby is reduced or cut off. This can happen with a breech baby or with a transverse or unstable lie. This is a medical emergency and the baby has be delivered very quickly, usually by an emergency Caesarean section.
Prostaglandin -  A natural substance used in pessaries to soften the cervix and stimulate the start of labour.
Progesterone only pill (POP) -  Progestogen-only pills contain a synthetic derivative of the hormone progesterone, but don't contain oestrogen. They are less effective than the OCP and have a different side effect profile. They can be used to treat a range of gynaecological conditions.
Pudendal block -  A local anaesthetic given to block pain around the cervix and vagina before using forceps.
Rhesus (Rh) -  The rhesus blood group system is a way of categorising your blood type.
Rooming in -  Most maternity units now recommend that babies stay with their mums 24 hours a day. This helps with feeding and bonding. It also reduces the risk of infection.
Rubella -  Also called German measles. If contracted by woman during pregnancy, it can result in birth defects.
Second stage of labour -  The time from full dilation of the cervix to the moment when the baby is outside the mother’s body. Pushing during the second stage can last from a few minutes up to a couple of hours.
Show -  A show is when the thick mucus which plugs the narrow channel of the cervix during pregnancy comes away. It is a sign that the body is getting ready for labour.
Skin-to-skin -  Skin-to-skin contact with your baby after birth (your baby is dried and put straight onto your chest).
Sub-total hysterectomy -  Removal of the uterine body with preservation of the cervix.
Syntocinon -  This is a synthetic version of a naturally made hormone called oxytocin which increases contractions. It is sometimes used to speed up labours that have become slow, or to reduce bleeding after a baby is born. It is also sometimes given to speed up the delivery of the placenta. It is always given as an injection, either into a muscle or vein.
Syntometrine -  This contains two drugs (syntocinon and ergomerine) that help the womb contract after the baby is born. It is sometimes used to speed up the delivery of the placenta or to stop bleeding after birth.
Tachycardia -  A rapid heart rate, usually defined as greater than 100 beats per minute.
TENS -  Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation – a device for relieving the pain of labour. Sticky pads are attached to the woman’s back to produce electrical impulses which stimulate her own natural painkillers and block some of the pain signals from the uterus. The unit is battery operated and the woman can control the amount of stimulation herself with a push button device and a variable control dial.
Term -  This used to describe the period of time at the end of a pregnancy when a baby might be expected to be born. It is 37-42 weeks which is the normal duration of a human pregnancy.
Third stage -  Delivery of the placenta (afterbirth).
Transition -  The tough-going, final part of the first stage of labour, when the mother may begin to feel the urge to push. Contractions may come thick and fast and can feel very hard to cope with.
Tranexamic acid (TXA) -  An oral pharmaceutical agent that is an antifibrinolytic which is used to treat or prevent blood loss. It is non-hormonal and has relatively few side effects. 
Transverse lie -  A baby who is lying across the uterus horizontally, rather than vertically. In this position the baby cannot be born and there is a high risk of the cord prolapsing.
Trial of labour -  A woman with known complications, for example a previous Caesarean birth, may be given a trial of labour to see if she is able to give birth naturally. After a certain time, if labour fails to progress satisfactorily and it seems unlikely that the baby can be delivered safely through the vagina, she will be offered a Caesarean.
Trimester -  One third of a pregnancy.
Ultrasound scan -  A screening or diagnostic technique in which very high frequency sound waves are passed into the body, and the reflected echoes are detected and analysed to build a picture of the internal organs or of a fetus in the uterus.
Umbilical cord -  The thick cord of intertwining blood vessels that links baby and placenta, and carries oxygen and nourishment to the baby.
Unstable lie -  The baby changes position often and cannot be considered to be in any definite position.
Uterus or womb -  The hollow muscular organ in which the baby lives until birth.
VE -  Vaginal examination.
Ventouse -  This is the name given to a method of vacuum extraction to help the baby be born at the end of the labour, either if the mother is very tired or if the baby has become distressed.
Vernix -   A white, waxy substance that covers the fetus in the uterus.
White cell count (WCC) -  Measure of the white blood cells in the blood stream, which indicates body response to infection or sepsis. Typically rises in infection but can fall when there is overwhelming sepsis.
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) -  This is an aneurysm or dilatation of the aorta involving the aorta within the abdomen.  The vast majority affect the aorta below the renal arteries.  It is the most frequent variety of aortic aneurysm, causing 9,000 deaths in the UK each year.  The National AAA Screening Programme was launched in 2009 to detect AAAs before they rupture.  The usual indication for repair in men is when the AAA reaches a diameter of 5.5cms (5.0cms in women).
Acetabulum -  The acetabulum is the socket or cup that holds the head of the femur and allows it to move as a ball and socket joint.  Central dislocation of the hip is caused when the acetabulum fractures due to a lateral force on the hip or a powerful driving force along the shaft of the femur (such as a severe deceleration injury with the knees striking the dashboard of a car).
Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (APTT) -  This is a blood coagulation test where the normal range is approximately 27-35seconds. Adequate heparinization is achieved if the APTT is extended to 90-120seconds with an APTT ratio in the range 2.5-3.5. APTT may be falsely elevated in patients with lupus anticoagulant (antiphospholipid syndrome). 
Adult Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS or Shock lung) -  This describes a severe pulmonary inflammation associated with traumatic or surgical shock, severe haemorrhage with multiple blood transfusion and particularly with overwhelming sepsis (infections).  The lungs fill with fluid (non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema) and become stiff and inefficient.  The patient requires ventilation, which may cause further lung injury.  It is one of the most common causes of death in patients on Intensive Care Units.
Adhesion -  A fibrous scar that forms between loops of bowel or between the bowel and the abdominal wall or other intra-abdominal obstructions following surgery.  Thought to be caused by inflammation of the bowel surface or abdominal wall or by ischaemia as may occur due to the insertion and tying of sutures.  Adhesions inevitably make further surgery difficult.  Occasionally an adhesion may contract around bowel causing a ring or even obstruction.  Adhesions between the bowel and the abdominal wall may form a band that creates an internal hernia ring through which a loop of bowel may pass to become entrapped, obstructed or even strangulated.
Anaemia -  This is a low level of haemoglobin in the blood which reduces the ability of blood to carry oxygen.  Anaemia can be easily measured by the haemoglobin which correlates closely with the haematocrit (the proportion of blood volume represented by cells).  Anaemia due to chronic shortages such as inadequate iron or vitamins is better tolerated than acute anaemia associated with haemorrhage.  Chronic anaemias may be treated by iron or vitamin therapy, whereas acute anaemia associated with haemorrhage (Hb < 8.0 g/dL) usually requires blood transfusion with urgent surgery to stop bleeding.
Anastomosis -  This describes the surgical joining of two tubes, usually either gut or arteries.  Arterial anastomosis, or anastomosis between an artery and a graft is usually constructed surgically using fine monofilament sutures such as prolene.  Anastomoses may be end to end or end to side where the end of a graft is spatulated and implanted into the side of the host artery as a bypass.
Aneurysm -  A dilatation of a blood vessel in which the wall of that vessel has stretched or distended.  As the lumen of the aneurysm increases, blood flow becomes stagnant and thrombus may form within the aneurysm.  In peripheral arteries, this thrombus may embolise to occlude distal arteries.  Although any aneurysm may rupture, rupture is only frequent in aortic aneurysm.  
Angiodysplasia - Describes a vascular abnormality, usually in the gastrointestinal tract, that may cause gastrointestinal bleeding. It does not describe a clear vascular pathology, but rather degeneration of superficial blood vessels immediately deep to the musical surface that may become a source of bleeding.  This diagnosis is often applied to a bleeding point in the gut (the colon particularly) where no other cause of bleeding can be identified. Angiodysplasia may be caused by hypoperfusion or severe illness impairing the blood supply to the gut. It is not a vascular abnormality that can be seen on vascular imaging such as angiography (unless it is a source of bleeding). 
Angioplasty -  Angioplasty is any procedure designed to increase the diameter of a narrow or stenosed artery.  Although previously referring to the surgical incision of a patch in to the artery wall at the site of the narrowing, this terms now predominantly refers to transluminal angioplasty where a high-pressure balloon on a catheter is passed through the narrowing and then inflated under pressure crushing atherosclerotic disease and frequently rupturing the rigid atherosclerotic inner layer of the artery allowing the artery to expand and improve in the lumen.  More recently still, angioplasty is frequently accompanied by stenting (see below). 
Ankle-Brachial Pressure Index (ABPI) -  This is a simple measure of the ankle arterial pressure using a hand-held Doppler ultrasound.  The ankle arterial pressure is normally equal to or higher than the brachial pressure in the arm giving an ABPI of >1.0.  This pressure is frequently in the range 1.0 - 1.2.  A pressure below 0.8 is considered abnormal, although pressures of 0.9 may also be abnormal.  An exercise challenge may be appropriate to detect arterial stenosis in patients with a normal or near-normal ABPI.
Anterior Compartment syndrome -  This is a compartment syndrome involving the anterior compartment of the lower leg which is surrounded by the tibia medially, the fibula and interosseous membrane posteriorly and an inelastic fascia antero-laterally.  This compartment is particularly prone to compartmental syndrome.
Antiphospholipid syndrome -  This describes an increased tendency to both arterial and venous thrombosis due to both an abnormality in the blood and an influence on the lining of the arteries or veins (arterial and venous endothelium).  Typically, the patient has anti-phospholipid antibodies (anti-cardiolipin antibodies) and will usually also have lupus anti-coagulant.  The increased hyper-coagulability associated with anti-phospholipid syndrome is known to occur when there is lupus anticoagulant even if anti-phospholipid antibodies are negative.  Spontaneous thrombosis in small arteries or thrombus formation on minimal arterial disease is a feature of this condition.  It is usually treated with life-long anticoagulation.  
Aorta -  The main artery arising from the heart from which all the branches supplying the body and its organs arise.  It is a thick-walled artery containing elastic tissue and measuring approximately 2.5-3.0cms in diameter in the ascending aorta arising from the heart, 2.0-2.5cms in diameter in the descending thoracic aorta in the chest and 1.5-2cms in diameter in the abdomen above where it divides into the common iliac arteries supplying the lower limbs and pelvis.
Aortic aneurysm -  A dilatation of the aorta which tends to progress until the aortic wall is under such tension that rupture may occur.
Aortic stenosis -  A narrowing of the aortic valve that restricts cardiac output and causes left-ventricular hypertrophy. Aortic stenosis may be associated with sudden death, particularly in patients with coexisting coronary artery disease. It is an important risk factor in major surgery as the restricted cardiac output may be insufficient to compensate for inflammatory consequences of surgery or infection.
Aorto-bifemoral graft -  This describes a bifurcated graft (trouser graft) where the main stem of the graft is anastomosed to the aorta, usually just below the renal arteries and each limb of the graft is passed retro-peritoneally, immediately in front of the iliac arteries, to be anastomosed to the common femoral arteries in the groin.
Aorto-bi-iliac graft -  This describes a bifurcated graft (trouser graft) where the main stem of the graft is anastomosed to the aorta, usually just below the renal arteries and each limb of the graft is passed retro-peritoneally, immediately in front of the iliac arteries, to be anastomosed to the external iliac arteries in the pelvis.
Aorto-duodenal fistula -  This is where there is bleeding from the aorta into the duodenum which may cause haematemesis (vomiting blood) or melaena (altered blood passed per rectum).  Aorto-duodenal fistulae are rare and most frequently follow previous aortic surgery where the vascular graft has become detached from the aorta causing a pseudo-aneurysm that ruptures into the duodenum, or where the graft erodes into the duodenum due to a low-grade infection.  Spontaneous aorto-duodenal fistula may occur when an aortic aneurysm ruptures anteriorly into the second or third part of the duodenum or if there is a mycotic (infected) aneurysm of the aorta which erodes or ruptures into the duodenum.
Arterial thrombosis -  Is a thrombus forming within an artery, usually on arterial disease.  The most common varieties of arterial thrombosis are when arteries narrowed by atherosclerosis finally thrombose due to adherent platelets and fibrin causing ischaemia (an in-adequate blood supply) to the distal tissues.  Examples are coronary thrombosis causing myocardial infarction (heart attack) or carotid or cerebrovascular thrombosis causing a stroke.  Arterial thrombosis is also a frequent cause of angina (pain in the heart muscle on exercise), intermittent claudication (pain in a leg muscle on exercise) and ischaemia of the leg which may require arterial reconstruction or amputation.  If an arterial thrombosis embolises, it will usually only embolise to the distal small arteries causing ischaemia of the tissues supplied by those arteries.
Arteriovenous fistula -  This is an abnormal communication between the high-pressure arterial and the lower pressure venous circulation.  Multiple arterio-venous fistulae may occur in a limb due to a congenital abnormality.  A-V fistulae may follow trauma where laceration results in abnormal flow between adjacent arteries and veins.  Arterio-venous fistulae are also constructed at operation, most frequently at the wrist but occasionally at the elbow, to produce large arm veins with high blood flow suitable for haemodialysis.
Arteriovenous malformation -  This describes any abnormal communication between the arterial and venous circulation.  Typically, a malformation involves multiple abnormal communications between microscopic arteries and veins implying an area of tissue with an abnormal microcirculation.  Small arterio-venous fistulae may be associated with haemorrhage (particularly into the brain) or tissue ischaemia causing ulceration of the skin.  Larger arterio-venous malformations, perhaps involving an entire limb, may involve high arterio-venous flows causing increased cardiac output or even heart failure.  Many birthmarks are examples of arterio-venous malformations, particularly port-wine stains.
Artery -   A relatively thick-walled blood vessel that conducts blood away from the heart and towards the body’s tissues.  The blood pressure within arteries is high and pulsatile as the arterial system absorbs each cardiac contraction and distributes high pressure blood around the body.  The largest artery is the aorta which conducts the blood from the left heart to the rest of the body with arteries serving all the limbs and organs progressively branching to smaller arteries with arterioles supplying capillaries which perfuse the tissue.
Arthroscopy -  A minimally-invasive procedure in which a small telescope (arthroscope) is introduced into a joint to inspect for joint disease and to undertake procedures. Although minimally-invasive, this procedure usually requires general anaesthesia and when used in the knee impairs mobility for a period of at least 8-10 days.
Ascending lymphangitis (lymphangitis) -  Most infections will be associated with severe inflammation of the surrounding tissue (cellulitis).  Where the bacteria causing a local tissue infection enters the lymph vessels, there is rapid spread of infection along the lymphatic with signs of severe inflammation (a red streak proximal to the infection in a limb).  Ascending lymphangitis of this type usually destroys the lymphatic, may cause fibrosis of lymph nodes and is an important cause of lymphoedema.  Recurrent cellulitis or lymphangitis usually makes lymphoedema worse; many patients are treated with prophylactic antibiotics to prevent this.
Atherosclerosis -  A degenerative disease of arteries that develops usually in the elderly and which has been described in lay terms as “hardening of the arteries”.  The first features are when lipids such as cholesterol enter the lining of the artery wall to cause fatty streaks which may be seen as early as teenage years.  The result is an inflammatory process producing atherosclerotic plaques which may grow to sufficient size that the centre of the plaque liquefies.  Large or circumferential atherosclerotic plaques may cause a stenosis (see below) disturbing blood flow and causing both thrombosis and embolism.  Atherosclerotic plaques may rupture discharging atherosclerotic debris into the arterial blood flow causing embolisation to distal tissues.  Plaque rupture is one of the mechanisms that may lead to acute thrombosis of a diseased artery causing myocardial infarction (heart attack) in the coronary arteries, stroke in the arteries to the brain or tissue ischaemia anywhere in the body.
Atrial fibrillation -  This is a cardiac condition causing an irregular and frequently rapid heartbeat. The normal bright atrial pacemaker fails to dominate the heart rate and the atrium almost continuously contracts with erratic electrical signals causing the ventricles to contract at an irregular and rapid rate. The failure of normal contraction in the left atrium may result in thrombus formation in the atrial appendage (left auricle).  This thrombus may detach and embolise into the aorta causing a stroke if it enters the cerebral circulation or obstructing branches of the aorta (most frequently the arteries to the leg).
Atrioventricular septal defect -  This is a major congenital cardiac defect in which the septum between both the atria and the ventricles of the heart has failed to form adequately.  As the left heart pressures are higher than those on the right, blood is pumped from the left heart back to the venous side of the heart, recirculating through the lungs.  It is a cause of high right heart pressures and heart failure.  As there is mixing of the artery and venous blood, it is also a cause of a venous to arterial circulation shunt allowing paradoxical emboli of venous thrombi into the arterial circulation.
Bacterial aortitis -  This is when there is an infection involving atherosclerosis within the lumen of the aorta.  The most frequent organism to cause this infection is salmonella (salmonella aortitis) which may have gained access to the bloodstream during salmonella blood poisoning.  The bacteria causes a low-grade infection with night sweats, weight loss, back and abdominal pain.  The inflammation weakens the abdominal wall causing an aneurysm that frequently ruptures before the aneurysm has dilated to the usual size of rupture (over 5cms in the aorta).  Repair of an infected aorta is frequently followed by infection of the vascular graft used for the repair.
Bacterial meningitis -  This is an infection of the surface of the brain that may occur spontaneously from organisms carried in the blood (eg meningococci) or if there is a fracture of the skull involving a sinus such as the frontal sinus.  If not treated promptly, severe brain injury may result.
Basilar artery -  Is the artery formed on the anterior brain stem from the junction of the two vertebral arteries.  It supplies blood to the brain stem and hindbrain. Ischaemia of the hindbrain frequently causes visual disturbances, loss of coordination and loss of balance.  Ischaemia of the brain stem is usually fatal but may cause ‘locked in syndrome’.
Berry aneurysm -  A thin-walled, usually small, aneurysm arising from one of the cerebral arteries in the brain.  Thought to be congenital.  Berry aneurysms are the most frequent cause of intra-cerebral (sub-arachnoid) haemorrhage.  Such haemorrhage is a frequent cause of stroke or sudden death in young adults.
Biopsy -  This is a minor procedure in which a small piece of tissue is taken for histological examination.  Bleeding is rarely a complication of biopsy except in the case of biopsying a solid organ such as the liver.
Brachial Artery -  The artery in the upper arm between the axillary artery at the shoulder and the division of the brachial artery into the ulna and radial arteries just below the elbow.
Brachial plexus -  The plexus of nerves arising from the cervical spine consisting of five nerve roots which emerge into three trunks lying over the first rib. These three trunks then divide into five divisions that supply the nerves to the arm. The brachial plexus is vulnerable to injury when the shoulder is forcibly depressed in an accident. The trunks of the brachial plexus, especially the inferior trunk, are prone to irritation in thoracic outlet syndrome if the space over the first rib is “tight” or if there is a cervical rib or scalene band.
Brachial plexus injury -  This injury occurs to the plexus of nerves supplying the upper arm when the shoulder is forcibly depressed in a major accident.  It is most frequently seen in motorcyclists who fall off their motorcycle and where the shoulder hits a solid object such as the kerb of the road.  The shoulder is depressed sufficiently that the nerves in the brachial plexus rupture or, worse still, the nerve root is pulled out of the spinal cord.  If the latter, this condition is untreatable and the patient may sometimes be better to accept amputation.
Brachiocephalic artery -  This is the first branch from the aortic arch and is a large artery approximately 8mm in diameter and 3cm long supplying the right arm and head.  It divides into the right common carotid and subclavian arteries while still in the thorax below and behind the sternoclavicular joint. 
Brachiocephalic vein -  This is a large vein approaching 2cms in diameter which drains venous blood returning to the heart from the internal jugular and subclavian veins on the relevant side.  The anatomy and the nomenclature for these veins is variable as these veins may be called the innominate veins.  The left brachiocephalic vein is consistently present but at the right internal jugular and subclavian veins may drain directly into the superior vena cava.
Bradycardia -  An abnormally slow pulse rate.  May be associated with vagal activity when this is associated with a simple faint.  May also be a symptom of heart block.
Budd-Chiari syndrome -  This describes the acute onset of abdominal pain with ascites and an enlarged liver and spleen. The prognosis is poor and patients die of progressive liver failure. It can be treated with portosystemic shunting which may achieve survival rates of around 50% by 5 years. It is associated with hypercoagulable states and polycythaemia rubra vera is the single most frequent cause.
Buerger’s Disease -  See Thromboangiitis Obliterans.
Calf muscle pump -  This describes the pumping mechanism of the calf during walking.  The deep veins of the calf are larger than necessary to merely conduct blood through the leg and act in a similar way to the chambers of the heart.  When the calf muscle contracts on raising the heel, it is confined within a rigid fascia and squeezes in on these veins pumping the contents of these veins towards the heart.  When the calf muscles relax as the foot is lifted, the valves within the deep veins normally prevent reflux of blood back into these calf veins.  In this way, venous blood from the legs is progressively pumped proximally towards the heart.
Carpel Tunnel Syndrome -  This describes symptoms of numbness and tingling in the thumb, index and middle finder that develops at night in patients where the median nerve is compressed by the flexor retinaculum over the anterior surface of the wrist. This is the most common of the upper limb neuropathies and is treated by a surgical procedure to divide the flexor retinaculum.
Carotid Artery -  The carotid arteries lie on either side of the anterior neck; the common carotid artery divides into the external carotid artery supplying the face and scalp and the internal carotid artery supplying the brain.  Atherosclerotic disease at the carotid bifurcation, predominantly involving the internal carotid artery, is a frequent cause of ischaemic stroke (cerebral infarction).  It is now recognised that carotid endarterectomy is indicated when the carotid stenosis is > 50%, although many surgeons would delay endarterectomy until the stenosis is > 70%.
Carotid dissection -  This is where a small tear develops in the intima allowing arterial blood (under pressure) to enter the carotid artery wall stripping the inner layers of the artery from the more elastic outer layer.  These dissections rarely extend for more than a few centimetres, but as arterial blood passes into the arterial wall it may compress the inner lining of the artery such that the lumen occludes causing thrombosis.  More frequently, the patient may experience pain in the jaw or ear over a period of 5-10 days.  Occasionally, thrombus at the site of the dissection may embolise into the brain causing an ischaemic stroke days or even weeks following the dissection.  Most patients suffering a dissection are treated with Warfarin to prevent thrombus formation and embolisation.
Cellulitis -  This describes an acute inflammatory response involving the skin and subcutaneous tissues.  Most frequently this is due to a spreading infection -  Typically, a Streptococcus.  The skin and subcutaneous tissue swells, is oedematous, red or pink, hot and tender.  The patient usually has a temperature.  The treatment is high elevation and intravenous antibiotics when the cause is infection.  Cellulitis may also be caused by prolonged dependency in patients with obesity or venous disease and by superficial thrombophlebitis (thrombosis of superficial or varicose veins).
Cerebral infarction -  A type of stroke known as ischaemic stroke in which an area of brain tissue has died due to ischaemia (see below) commonly caused by arterial thrombosis, embolism into the cerebral circulation or dissection of an artery supplying the brain.  It may also be associated with migraine.
Cervical artery -  This is a collective term for the carotid and vertebral arteries.
Cervical rib -  This is a congenital anomaly where there is a supernumery rib located above the normal first rib.  A cervical rib is present in only approximately 1 in 500 (0.2%) of people and can cause compression to the nerves or blood vessels passing to the arms.
Claudication (intermittent claudication) -  This word is derived from the Greek claudicarae which means to limp.  The symptom describes ischaemic pain (pain due to an inadequate blood supply) in the leg muscles when exercised, as in walking.  When the arteries supplying the leg are narrowed or occluded, sufficient blood may pass through the narrow artery or collaterals (smaller blood vessels generally passing through muscles) to supply the needs of the tissue when at rest.  On exercise, muscle requires a ten-fold increase in blood supply which cannot be met when the main artery is blocked or narrowed.  The muscle then develops cramping pain analogous to angina in the heart which is relieved by resting.  Following a short rest, the individual can usually walk a similar distance again hence intermittent claudication. 
Clivus -  A solid and strong bone forming part of the base of the skull immediately anterior to the foramen magnum through which the brain stem passes down to become the spinal cord. Fractures of the clivus are rare and indicate very severe base of skull fractures. They are frequently fatal due to injury to the brain stem or the basilar artery.
Clopidogrel -  This is a medication, which provides an anticoagulation effect by inhibiting platelet function. It is commonly used to reduce the risk of thromboembolic complications or disease. It does have side effects including gastritis and GI haemorrhage although to a less extent than its alternative agent aspirin. It can also have unwanted side effects in the form of bleeding.    
Coeliac axis -  Anterior branch in the upper abdominal aorta that supplies the stomach, liver, spleen, pancreas and duodenum.
Combined Oral Contraceptive Pill (COC) -  This describes oral contraceptive pills containing oestrogen and a progestogen.  These are highly reliable and reversible oral contraceptives introduced in the 1960’s, with second-generation COCs used successfully for four decades since the 1970’s.  Third-generation COCs containing the progestogens Desogestrel and Gestodene were introduced by the pharmaceutical industry as “low-dose” COCs but were subsequently found to have a higher risk of causing venous thromboembolism than second-generation COCs.
Common Iliac Artery -  The first branch of the aorta supplying the pelvis and legs.
Common Iliac Veins -  These large pelvic veins drain the blood from the legs and pelvis into the vena cava.  They are thin-walled, easy to tear and may bleed torrentially if lacerated during surgery.  DVT involving the common iliac veins is often missed as these veins are difficult to see on ultrasound.
Compartment syndrome -  Describe pain and muscle ischaemia within a fixed anatomical compartment.  The most frequent compartment involved is the anterior tibial compartment in the lower leg where the boundaries are the tibial medially, interosseous membrane and the fibula posteriorly and a thick deep fascial sheath covering the calf antero-laterally.  Wherever muscle is confined within a strong, fibrous, deep fascia, compartment syndromes may occur (lower leg and forearm).  Typically, severe swelling of the muscle following an episode of ischaemia results in high pressures within the confined compartment which prevent venous return and aggravate the severity of the swelling.  Ultimately, the pressure within the compartment rises to a level that it prevents any circulation to the involved muscles which becomes severely ischaemic and ultimately dies (necrosis).  If detected early enough, dividing the deep fascia over the compartment relieves the pressure and allows the muscle to recover (fasciotomy).  When a fasciotomy is required in a limb t is usual to release the pressure in all the relevant muscle compartments (three compartments in the lower leg and two compartments in the forearm). 
Compound fracture -  A bone fracture where the fractured bone end has perforated the skin leading to a risk of infection of where the wound or bone marrow may be contaminated by dirt, clothing or even soil.  It requires surgical debridement prior to reduction and wound closure to cover the fracture site.
Crohn’s disease -   A chronic inflammatory disease of the small bowel that may also affect the colon or large bowel. It is thought to be an autoimmune disease with inflammation of the small bowel mucosa causing thickening of the bowel wall and stenoses but may cause obstruction.  Although sometimes mild, it is often aggressive causing severe symptoms and requiring surgery. The symptoms are of small bowel colic (cramping pain in the mid abdomen), diarrhoea with mucus or blood, and weight loss which can be profound due to malabsorption. 
Cyanosis -  A blue discolouration due to deoxygenated blood in the circulation. Peripheral cyanosis may occur when the circulation is sluggish and the tissues extract much of the available oxygen form blood as it circulates through the hands and feet.  Central cyanosis, affecting the lips and tongue, indicates that the arterial blood is relatively desaturated and that there is a serious problem influencing the function of the heart or the lungs.  Central cyanosis may occur when there is venous blood passing directly into the arterial circulation through a “hole in the heart” but may also occur when the function of the lungs is impaired by a pulmonary embolus or by severe lung disease.
D-dimer -  This is a breakdown product of fibrin formed when blood clots or forms a thrombosis.  An elevated level of D-dimer is found on venous blood analysis in patients who have recently had a deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism or any arterial thrombosis.  D-dimer may also be elevated by inflammation or as a consequence of surgery/injury.  Measuring D-dimer is an early screening test for possible DVT or PE with an elevated D-dimer being an indication to undertake an imaging test to confirm or exclude venous thromboembolism (VTE).
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) -  This is a thrombus or clot forming within a vein.  The blood flow in the veins is slow and a deep vein thrombosis occurs as a result of three factors; i) increased coagulability of blood, ii) venous stasis allowing blood coagulation and iii) injury to the vein impairing the function of the venous endothelium (the lining of the vein that prevents thrombosis).  Venous thrombosis classically causes swelling of the involved limb or organ, pain and a temperature.  If this venous thrombus detaches it will usually embolise to the lung as a pulmonary embolus (PE) but occasionally it may embolise through a patent foramen ovale in the heart as apparent paradoxical embolism to block a systemic artery causing ischaemia such as stroke.
Degloving injury -  Is where the skin is sheared over the underlying deep fascia by severe trauma, such as being run over by the wheels of a car, causing severe injury and tearing within the subcutaneous fat. This usually also results in tearing the blood vessels to the skin passing from the deep pressure through the subcutaneous fat. The initial appearance may be near-normal, but subsequently fat necrosis and necrosis of the skin may occur such that large areas of skin have to be debrided and treated by skin grafting. This usually results in very disfiguring scars and slow recovery.
Dementia – A degenerative condition of the brain associated with cardiovascular risk factors and increasing age.  The typical features are of short-term memory loss with apathy, loss of mobility and loss of balance.  The most frequent types of dementia are Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia, but the difference between these two diagnoses is unclear as they are both associated with cardiovascular risk factors and as any patient with a history of stroke or cerebral infarcts on brain imaging would tend to be classified a vascular dementia.  The features are of relentless decline over a period of 3-5 years.
Diabetic Foot -  The risk of ulceration in patients with diabetes is sufficiently high that the medical profession uses the term “diabetic foot” to describe the deterioration that occurs in the foot and the types of ulceration/infection that occur.  Risk factors for diabetic foot ulceration include the duration of diabetes, severity (insulin dependence), poor diabetic control, peripheral neuropathy causing loss of sensation, diabetic retinopathy as evidence of small artery disease, atherosclerotic disease of the arteries in the legs and structural changes to the tissues in the foot due to diabetes.  Peripheral neuropathy causes a loss of sensation so that pressure sores may develop into neuropathic ulcers. Diabetes is associated with an increased risk of infection, particularly of the soft tissues.  The result may be diabetic ulcers which become infected, with spreading infection within the tissues of the foot leading to gangrene of the toes.  These patients are at high risk of amputation of the toes, forefoot, or of below knee amputation.
Diabetic Nephropathy -  Describes deteriorating renal function leading to renal failure in patients with poorly controlled diabetes.  It is associated with diabetic retinopathy, peripheral neuropathy and small artery disease, possibly as they all represent small artery disease affecting the microcirculation in different organs.
Dissecting aortic aneurysm -  Caused by a tear in the luminal surface (endothelium) of the aorta allowing blood to enter a weakness in the aortic wall between the inner and outer layer of the media.  As the intima and inner layer of the medial are relatively rigid, high pressure blood may stretch the elastic outer layers of the artery away from the inner layers so that the dissection may progress down or up the aorta.  An extensive dissection may cause sufficient tension in the outer layers of the aorta that they rupture.  Dissections may also occlude branches of the aorta.
Doppler Ultrasound -  Ultrasound is reflected off moving red cells in blood creating a Doppler signal which changes in pitch according to the velocity of blood flow.  Hand-held Doppler is frequently used to detect flow in the arteries of the foot or wrist in order to measure the ankle arterial pressure.  Hand-held Doppler is also useful in the detection of reversed flow in varicose veins.  Doppler may be combined with grayscale ultrasound in the more detailed assessment of arteries and veins (see Duplex Ultrasound).
Ductus arteriosus -  This is a communication between the main pulmonary artery or pulmonary trunk and the aorta that exists in the embryo and which normally closes shortly following birth.  It allows the passage of blood entering the pulmonary artery into the aorta before the lungs inflate.  A patent ductus arteriosus is a cause of cyanosis in babies and requires surgery to close the abnormal communication between the pulmonary trunk and the aorta.
Duplex Ultrasound (duplex Doppler ultrasound or colour Doppler) -  This instrument combines greyscale ultrasound imaging of the soft tissues with colour-Doppler imaging of blood flow within vessels.  Greyscale ultrasound clearly depicts fluid-filled cavities such as blood vessels or cysts.  The vessel wall at right angles to the ultrasound signal reflects ultrasound clearly providing a sharp image.  Blood flow, and the direction of that flow, within the artery or vein is displayed in colour allowing rapid assessment of arteries and veins in the neck or limbs.  A cursor can be placed within the vessel lumen measuring the flow velocity which is the best indication on the haemodynamic significance of a stenosis (narrowing in the artery or vein).
DVT Prophylaxis -  Treatment is designed to prevent a DVT.  In its simplest form this consists of an elastic stocking to empty the deep veins of the leg and advising the patients to mobilise as quickly as possible, particularly after surgery.  In high risk patients it is usual to prescribe an anti-coagulant, usually a low molecular weight heparin fraction at a dose below the dose required for full anti-coagulation. 
Emboli -  These are particles of atherosclerosis, thrombus or other material that pass within the arterial or venous circulation.  In the case of arteries, this embolic material may obstruct branches of an artery impairing the blood supply of any of the organs supplied by that artery.
Embolism -  Passage of a solid particle, such as a thrombus, from one part of the arterial circulation to another.  Venous thrombi normally embolise to the lungs (pulmonary embolism).  Arterial emboli may embolise to any organ or tissue in the body.
Embolisation -  The process by which one or more frequently many emboli may damage an organ or organs.
Endocarditis -  An inflammation involving the heart valves (or any part of the lining of the heart) which is usually associated with infection by a bacterium.  These infections are difficult to clear, typically vegetations form on the heart valves and may embolise to cause stroke or damage to the other organs in the body.  Occasionally these emboli contain bacteria which may result in infection or abscesses in tissues throughout the body (septic emboli).  Long-term intravenous antibiotic therapy is required.
Endocarditis (infective) -  Infective endocarditis is an infection involving the lining of the heart, usually affecting a diseased heart valve.  Typically, thrombus forms on the infected heart valve (forming a vegetation) and infected thrombus may then embolise to other organs in the body.  This condition may be difficult to diagnose and to treat as eradicating infection in a diseased valve may prove impossible short of replacing the valve by open surgery.
EVAR (Endovascular Aneurysm Repair) -  This describes the repair of an abdominal aortic aneurysm using a stent graft inserted via cannulation of the common femoral arteries in the groin (or occasionally one or both of the iliac arteries and assembled within the aneurysm sac.  Usually a bare stent, with or without hooks to penetrate the aorta wall, passes above the renal artery with the graft component (a stent covered with fabric graft) sealing to the aorta below the renal arteries.  More complex fenestrated and chimney grafts are performed when the aneurysm extends up to or above the renal arteries.
External iliac artery -  The common iliac artery divides into the external and internal iliac arteries in the pelvis with the external iliac artery supplying the leg and becoming the common femoral artery as it passes under the inguinal ligament.
Extubated -  Although literally meaning the removal of any tube, when used in medical records this term usually refers to the removal of an endotracheal tube after a patient has been taken off a ventilator so that they can breathe themselves and recover the ability to talk.
Factor V Leiden deficiency -  This is a variety of thrombophilia which increases the risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE).  It is an inherited abnormality which reduces the ability of circulating blood to dissolve early thrombus formation in the veins.  It causes a deficiency in activated protein-C, known as APC resistance (APCr).  This abnormality is particularly associated with DVT and PE in women on the combined oral contraceptive pill or hormone replacement therapy (HRT).
Fasciotomy -  The division of the deep fascia surrounding muscle compartments to reduce pressure; typically required following severe trauma causing bleeding into or swelling of muscles within compartments bound by bone and inelastic deep fascia such that compartment syndrome develops (see above).  Fasciotomy should always be undertaken to divide the deep fascia surrounding all the involved muscle, typically in the lower leg where all three compartments of the leg (anterior, peroneal and posterior) should be released throughout full length incisions and the deep posterior compartment release.  Forearm fasciotomy following fractures or other injuries may be required and thigh fasciotomies following direct impact injuries (known in rugby as ‘dead leg’).  These full-length incisions often need treatment with skin grafts to get healing and obvious scarring is inevitable.  
Fat necrosis -  This describes death of fatty tissues due to severe bruising or disruption to the blood supply to the fat, usually in an area of subcutaneous tissue.  Necrosing fat is turned into soap which appears as a hard, tender mass initially although tenderness is lost over 6-8 weeks.  This is an inflammatory process that causes pain initially and may result in puckering of the overlying skin at a later stage.  It is usually benign. 
Femoral artery -  Blood from the heart passes down the aorta which divides into the common iliac arteries in the abdomen, the external iliac artery passing under the inguinal ligament in the groin to become the common femoral artery which is a large artery 6-8mmin diameter but only 2-3cm long.  It divides into the profunda (deep) femoral artery which supplies the thigh, the superficial femoral artery which passes through the thigh to supply the lower legs.  It is only 2cm deep to the skin in normal individuals and easily accessible for surgery.
Femoral embolectomy -  Embolectomy is a procedure in which thrombus or embolus is removed through an arteriotomy (an incision into the artery).  The most frequent embolus to be removed is a saddle embolus of the aortic bifurcation or an embolus into the common femoral bifurcation arising from the heart and due to either a previous myocardial infarction or atrial fibrillation.  The embolectomy is usually performed through a vertical incision in the groin and an arteriotomy into the femoral artery with a catheter with a balloon at the end passed closely up the iliac arteries into the aorta so that the balloon can be inflated and pulled down extracting embolism and any secondary thrombus through the arteriotomy.  This procedure is then repeated in the superficial femoral and profunda femoris arteries until good downflow from above and backflow of blood from below is achieved.  Closure of the arteriotomy then allows the circulation to the limb to be restored. 
Femoral Nerve -  The femoral nerve lies immediately lateral to the common femoral artery in the groin, such that Vascular Surgeons should be acutely aware of the risk that this nerve could be damaged.  Injury to the femoral nerve in vascular reconstruction is rare but may be considered an acceptable accident only in patients with scarred groins following previous surgery.  The femoral nerve supplies the muscles in the anterior thigh, with injury impairing extension of the knee and causing loss of sensation over the front of the thigh.  As this is a mixed nerve supplying sensation and muscle function, nerve repair is difficult and largely ineffective.
Femoral Vein -  The common femoral vein receives blood from the lower leg via the superficial femoral vein and from the thigh (profunda femoral vein).  It lies immediately medial to the common femoral artery (figure 1) and is a large vein approximately 1.5- 2cm in diameter.  All veins have thin walls that may be easily injured or torn causing torrential bleeding.
Femoro-distal bypass -  A bypass from the common or superficial femoral artery to an artery distal to the knee.  This may be the distal popliteal artery but this term is usually used for a bypass to one of the calf arteries.  The bypass graft is usually reversed or in situ long saphenous vein with the valves destroyed using a Valvulotome.  When a prosthetic bypass is needed for femoro-distal bypasses, the long-term results tend to be poor.
Femoro-femoral crossover -  This describes an “extra anatomic” bypass from one femoral artery to the other.  The usual indication is occlusion of the iliac artery on one side where translumenal angioplasty (with stenting as necessary) cannot be done and in a patient where the risk of surgery is thought to be too high to contemplate aorto or ilio-femoral bypass.  The procedure is low-risk involving incisions through the skin and fat only in both groins with a (usually) prosthetic graft passed across the lower abdomen from the femoral artery with a normal pulse to the femoral artery with no pulse, in order to supply the latter leg with arterial blood flow.  The five-year patency rate is approximately 50% which is lower than for aorto-femoral bypass and there is a small risk of graft infection due to the incision in both groins.
Femoropopliteal bypass -  A bypass from the femoral artery in the groin to the popliteal artery above or below the knee.  Usually performed for severe atherosclerotic disease or occlusion of the superficial femoral artery.  Occasionally performed for popliteal aneurysm or following arterial injury.  The bypass graft may be the long saphenous vein which can be reversed so that the valves do not impede blood flow or left in situ with the valves destroyed using a Valvulotome.  Alternatively, a prosthetic bypass with Dacron or PTFE may be used.  Three-year patency rates vary between 50 – 85%.
Flow-divider stent -  This is a stent designed to laminate blood flow within the lumen of an aneurysm such that the aneurysm sac thromboses into the stent wall but around the stent lumen, leaving normal blood flow through the stent. Many flow-dividers allow flow through the stent wall into side branches of the stented artery making them particularly appropriate for intracranial artery aneurysms, as occluding these side branches would be likely to cause cerebral infarction and stroke.
Foot drop -  This describes a loss of function in the anterior tibial compartment muscles which are responsible for dorsiflexing the foot.  When the knee is raised in walking, the toes and forefoot hang down and tend to catch on paving stones, curbs and stairs.  This is a major handicap usually treated with a splint designed to raise the forefoot.  It may develop due to ischaemia (loss of blood supply) to the muscles of the anterior tibial compartment, but more frequently follows an injury to the lateral popliteal or peroneal nerves that innervate these muscles.  There is no cure for an established foot drop.
Fulminating Infection -  Patients following splenectomy are prone to rapidly advancing septicaemia associated with infections due to pneumococci, meningicocci and haemophilus influenza. For this reason, they are usually advised to take Penicillin prophylaxis for the rest of their lives.  They are also immunised against infections with these specific organisms.
Gas gangrene -  Gas gangrene, or wet gangrene, is where tissue necrosis occurs due to infection.  The usual infecting organism is Clostridium welchii but in necrotising fasciitis a synergistic bacterial infection involving aerobic and anaerobic organisms working together causes severe toxaemia and rapidly spreading tissue necrosis.  Treatment involves resuscitation as the patient is frequently shocked, intravenous appropriate antibiotics and aggressive resection of all infected tissue.  The resulting defect is usually extensive requiring reconstruction by a Plastic Surgeon.  Major limb amputation is frequently required and mortality is high if the initial treatment is inadequate or delayed.  
Gangrene -  Necrosis of tissue which may be due to ischaemia, infection, pressure or a number of other causes.  In ischaemia, the gangrene tends to remain dry with the tissue shrivelling and turning black (dry gangrene).
Graft infection -  This describes when micro-organisms (bacteria or fungi) cause infection of a vascular graft which is a fabric.  These organisms may “hide” within the fabric such that clearing the infection is usually impossible as the organism is beyond the reach of the normal host defences and antibiotics.
Group a Streptococcus (GAS, Streptococcus Pyogenes) -  Is a gram-positive bacterium which may cause infections of the throat and which is typically associated with spreading cellulitis (soft tissue inflammation) of the skin or fascia.  It is associated with pneumonia, septicaemia (infection in the bloodstream) and both necrotising fasciitis and myositis.  It is an organism also involved in bacterial synergistic gangrene. It may be carried on the throat or skin without causing symptoms.
Haematoma -  A collection of blood outside an artery or vein.  Typically, the result of bleeding into the tissues.  Initially, a haematoma consists of clotted blood, but this breaks down and liquefies over time drawing in additional fluid and increasing the size and tension within the haematoma.  A frequent cause of wound infection or abscess.
Haemodialysis -  This is where a patient with renal failure is treated by circulating arterial blood through haemodialysis membranes so that toxic chemicals accumulated over the previous 2-3 days are removed by osmosis into the dialysis fluid.  Haemodialysis requires arterial and venous access delivering an adequate blood flow to the dialysis machine.  This is usually achieved by constructing an arterio-venous fistula at operation.
Haemofiltration -  This is similar to haemodialysis, and frequently used in intensive care units where full haemodialysis is difficult to implement. Arterial blood is passed under pressure through filtering tubes that allow excess fluid carrying toxic chemicals to be removed. Haemofiltration still requires arterial and venous access using catheters and full anticoagulation by heparin.
Hamartoma -  This is a benign congenital abnormality, usually a tumour.  It is different from the more common tumours, as the swelling consists of tissues normally present but in an abnormal proportion.  As an example, a chondroma would be an abnormal proportion of cartilage in or adjacent to a bone or joint.  An arteriovenous malformation would be an abnormal proportion of blood vessels in an area of tissue.  Most tumours consist of one type of cell that grows in an abnormal way (lipoma) with  many tumours being malignant (carcinoma or sarcoma) with the potential to invade other tissues or to metastasise remotely.  A hamartoma may grow but does not invade other tissues or metastasise.  Hamartomas only need treatment if they cause symptoms.
Hand-Arm Vibration Syndrome (HAVS) -  This describes the symptoms that may develop in the hands and arms after prolonged exposure to vibrating tools over many years.  The severity of the symptoms is thought to relate to the duration and severity of exposure to such tools.  Tools powered by compressed air appear to be a particular problem as compressed air that decompresses (escapes from a pressurized system) rapidly cools to precipitation of water vapour creating a cold wet environment.  HAVS would normally only develop after chronic exposure to high levels of vibration (two or more hours a day) over several years.  Typically, patients may have vasospastic symptoms (see vibration white finger (VWF) below) or neurological symptoms with numbness, tingling and a loss of fine sensations.  The severity of HAVS may be classified using either the Taylor-Parmear scale or the more recent and perhaps more complete Stockholm Workshop scale. 
Hemiarthroplasty -  This is a procedure in which half the hip joint is replaced.
Heparin -  Heparin is an anticoagulant that cannot be given orally but when administered intravenously achieves immediate and effective anticoagulation by acting at the end of the coagulation cascade.  Unfractionated heparins also had variable effects on different patients and have now largely been replaced by low molecular weight heparin fractions which can be administered subcutaneously in a dosage based on the patient’s weight.  When immediate urgent anticoagulation is required, intravenous unfractionated heparin is still given.
Hernia -  This is the protrusion of a viscous through an opening or “ring” into an abnormal position.  An abdominal wall hernia is where the contents of the abdomen herniate through the abdominal wall and an internal hernia is where a viscous herniates through an internal ring or adhesion.  If the gut is involved in a hernia it may obstruct or strangulate (suffer necrosis due to obstructing the blood supply) leading to gangrene of the gut.
Hip Arthroplasty (hip replacement surgery) -  This is a procedure in which the entire hip joint is replaced.  This is a ball and socket joint where the socket in the pelvis is described as acetabulum.  This acetabulum is shallow or inadequate following congenital hip replacement.  A metal or plastic cup is fixed into this acetabulum and usually held in place by cement.  A new metallic head of the femur inserted into the upper femur, fixed by cement and then reduced into the prosthetic “cup” replacing the acetabulum.  
Hypercoagulability -  An increased tendency of the blood to form a clot or thrombus.  May be associated with low blood flow in veins (venous stasis) or may occur as a natural defence to an injury or illness.  In women, hypercoagulability has been associated with hormone replacement therapy and combined oral contraceptive pills.
Hypertension -  High blood pressure.
Hyperthyroidism -  This describes the metabolic abnormality that occurs due to the increased production of thyroxine by the thyroid gland.  This may occur with an active adenoma within the gland and is most frequently caused by Graves’ disease which is thought to be an auto-immune stimulation of the gland.  It is treated by drugs to inhibit the production of thyroxine or by either radiotherapy or surgery to reduce the active tissue within the thyroid gland.  Hyperthyroidism is associated with an increased risk of venous thromboembolism.
Hypotension -  Low blood pressure.
Hypothyroidism – This describes a condition typified by increasing weight with lethargy and intolerance of the cold.  The underlying cause is a slowing in metabolism due to inadequate production of Thyroxine (a hormone produced by the thyroid gland).  Treatment is by giving sufficient Thyroxine to establish normal metabolism (a euthyroid state).
Incisional hernia -  This refers to a defect in the abdominal wall, at the site of a previous surgical incision, allowing protrusion of the abdominal contents.  Usually an incisional hernia will develop due to disruption of the deep layers (muscular layers) of an abdominal wall closure.  
Indirect inguinal hernia sac -  This describes an embryological remnant of the peritoneum which lines the peritoneal cavity descending into the scrotum as the testis descends through the abdominal wall from the retroperitoneum in early life.  This sac normally obliterates but may remain as a vestigial structure which could allow the development of an indirect inguinal hernia.  It is not known what proportion of these sacs develop herniation in later life, but the presence of an indirect sac is thought to be essential for the future development of an indirect inguinal hernia.
Infarction -  This is where tissue, an organ or part of an organ dies due to impaired blood supply.  This is a common cause of death in myocardial infarction (heart attack) or cerebral infarction (stroke).  Infarction may occur due to high pressures within a confined space (compartment syndrome) or due to severe venous hypertension following deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or relating to strangulated gut within a hernia.
Inferior vena cava -  This is a large vein, thin-walled but 2.5cms in diameter.  It lies adjacent to the aorta and drains blood from the lower half of the body back to the heart.  Thrombosis of the vena cava is rare, but emboli detaching from deep veins in the legs or pelvis may pass up the vena cava, through the heart into the lungs as a pulmonary embolus (PE).
Inflammatory AAA -  An abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) surrounded by ‘onion rings’ of inflammation which is thought to be secondary to the AAA or thrombus formation within the AAA.  Occasionally retroperitoneal fibrosis may be associated with AAA, but this may be coincidental.  
Inguinal hernia -  This is a hernia where the contents of the abdomen protrude into the inguinal canal or even through the external ring to form a lump in the groin or scrotum.  An indirect hernia is where the hernia forms through the indirect inguinal ring and passes down the inguinal canal due to the presence of a patent tunica vaginalis which is the remnant of the peritoneum which comes down as the testicle descends from the retroperitoneum into the scrotum.  For an indirect hernia to occur there must be a congenital abnormality within the inguinal canal.  A direct inguinal hernia is where the posterior wall of the inguinal canal is weak and bulges forward.  A hernia may become irreducible (cannot be returned to the abdomen), may cause obstruction of the gut if this passes into the hernia sac or may strangulate impairing the blood supply to the gut, causing necrosis.
Internal iliac artery -  This is a branch of the common iliac artery that supplies the pelvic viscera.  Access to the internal iliac artery is difficult which makes haemorrhage from an aneurysm or tear of this artery difficult to control.  Proximal control by clamp or ligation alone is inadequate as cross pelvic collaterals will cause vigorous back bleeding.  The origin of the internal iliac artery may need to be occluded in endovascular aneurysm repair.  Usually occlusion of one internal iliac artery is asymptomatic but may cause buttock claudication and vascular impotence in men.   
International Normalised Ratio (INR) -  This is a ratio of the prothrombin time while taking an oral anticoagulant over a normal controlled prothrombin time.  It is a simple measure to describe the degree of anticoagulation achieved by drugs such as warfarin.  The typical therapeutic range for a patient following deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism is to achieve an INR of 2.5-3.5.  In patients with thrombophilias (see below), particularly anti-phospholipid syndrome, the target INR may be 3.0-4.0.  
Intimal Injury -  When an artery is injured as part of the soft tissue injury associated with severe trauma or fractured bone, frequently there is intense stretching of the artery at the point of injury.  This may result in complete rupture, but frequently the inelastic inner layers of the artery (the intima and inner layer of the media) tear while the more elastic outer layer of the media and adventitia remain intact.  The result is a defect in the intima that may be 1-2 cms long, where a thrombosis often occurs.  Arterial pressure may stretch the outer layers away from the intima causing a dissection which itself may occlude the artery lumen. Regrettably, these injuries are often missed when doctors mistakenly believe they can feel a pulse distal to the injury.  Surgical repair is essential if the distal tissues are ischaemic.
Intra-cerebral haemorrhage -  A bleed into the brain tissue, frequently caused by abnormal fragility of the small arteries within the brain or Berry aneurysm.  A Berry aneurysm is thought to be a congenital weakness leading to a fusiform or sacular aneurysm of an artery within the brain which may burst to cause intra-cerebral or sub-arachnoid haemorrhage.  Intra-cerebral haemorrhage may be associated with brain injury or may occur into an infarct caused during ischaemic stroke (haemorrhagic transformation of an infarct).  Typically, the symptoms include headache, nausea and stroke.
Intubated -  Although literally this means inserting a tube (which could be of any sort) this term is usually used in medical records to indicate inserting an endotracheal tube into the trachea in order to ventilate the lungs using a ventilator.  The tube may be inserted either through the nose or through the mouth but is more comfortable for patients if through the nose.  There is a balloon on the end of the tube inserted into the trachea which is inflated to prevent aspiration of saliva or refluxed gastric juices into the lung.
Ischaemia -  Impaired blood supply to a tissue or organ.  Usually, this is due to arterial disease in an artery of supply.  Ischaemia may also follow thrombosis, embolism or dissection in artery of supply.  It may also occur when a tissue (usually the gut) becomes trapped, such as in a hernia, so that the venous drainage is impaired. Ischaemia may occur due to compression (compartment syndrome) and due to a wide range of other causes.  Severe ischaemia results in death of the tissue (necrosis) typically ischaemia causes severe pain such as in heart attack and loss of function of the involved tissues (paralysis or loss of sensation in a limb or stroke).
Ischaemic neuropathy - This describes persisting symptoms of numbness with pain and often with hyperaesthesia following an episode of severe ischaemia involving a limb. Also known as ischaemic monomelic neuropathy, it is thought that ischaemia damages the axon or nerve sheath. Although symptoms tend to improve over the following weeks or months, they may be permanent.
Ischaemic ulceration -  This usually refers to ulcers on the foot that occur due to minor local pressure or abrasion in patients where the arterial supply to the foot is inadequate for healing to occur.  Usually associated with rest pain, ischaemic ulceration is an indication to urgently reperfuse the leg in order to avoid necrosis and a risk of amputation.
Ischaemic Stroke -  Stroke is usually defined as a sudden onset of neurological deficit presumed to be of vascular cause.  Most strokes (over 75%) are due to ischaemia where the blood supply to an area of brain is impaired by occlusion of the supplying artery due to thrombus, embolism or arterial spasm.  In most cases, and ischaemic stroke is due to a cerebral infarct (an area of the brain that has died due to inadequate blood supply).  This is in contrast with haemorrhagic stroke or cerebral haemorrhage where a bleed into the brain tissue impairs brain function due to local pressure.
Laparotomy -  Any exploratory operation of the abdomen, usually where the underlying diagnosis is unclear.
Lipodermatosclerosis -  This describes a chronic inflammation of the subcutaneous tissue of the lower legs, most obvious medially just above the ankle. The tissue may become indurated with progressive thrombosis of the subcutaneous tissues causing a hard contraction of the skin. It is a typical feature of chronic venous insufficiency that may flare up with acute episodes mistaken for cellulitis. Failure to treat chronic venous insufficiency causing lipodermatosclerosis may result in venous ulceration.
Lupus Anticoagulant -  Lupus anticoagulant is a protein associated with prolongation of the activated partial thromboplastin time which is paradoxically associated with an increased tendency to both arterial and venous thrombosis.  It is detected by the DRVVT lupus screen and is strongly associated with anti-cardiolipin antibodies and anti-phospholipids syndrome.  The anti-cardiolipin antibody test is a more reliable test, but the presence of lupus anticoagulant in the absence of anti-cardiolipin antibodies is still associated with an increased risk of thrombosis.
Lymphoedema -  This is the accumulation of fluid in the tissue (oedema) caused by either obstruction or insufficiency within the lymphatic system.  Arterial blood is pumped under high pressure into the tissues with some of the fluid (extra-cellular fluid) leaking from the plasma within blood to bathe the tissues and deliver nutrients such as oxygen, glucose and amino acids.  Some of this fluid passes back into the venous side of the capillaries where the pressure is lower returning carbon monoxide and tissue metabolites.  Part of the extra-cellular fluid returns proximally via lymphatics which are extremely fragile vessels, too thin to be operated on.  If the number of lymphatics is less than normal, or the lymph nodes in the groin or retroperitoneum are diseased, replaced by cancer or eroded, there may be relative obstruction causing chronic swelling of the lower legs with heaviness.
Macular degeneration -  This is a frequent cause of blindness in the elderly.  The cause is thought to be small artery disease supplying the most sensitive part of the eye (the macula) causing loss of central vision and an inability to read.  It is frequently associated with vascular dementia.
Mastitis -  Any inflammation of breast tissue, usually precipitated by a blocked areola duct and only occasionally caused by infection.
Medial degeneration -  This describes degeneration of the middle layer of the media in arterial walls rendering the artery liable to dissection.   By far the most common cause for medial degeneration is atherosclerosis leading to dissection in major arteries such as the aorta.  Cystic medial degeneration is a condition that may lead to dissection or arterial occlusion in younger individuals.  Medial degeneration may also be associated with infection, inflammation or radiotherapy.  Spontaneous dissection may occur when vasa vasorum within the artery wall lead into the weakened layer of the media causing this to strip, rupturing other vasa vasorum which adds to the bleeding within the artery wall.  This may cause occlusion of the artery but more frequently stroke in carotid or vertebral artery dissection is caused by embolism due to the haematoma rupturing into the artery lumen.
Median nerve -  A nerve that supplies feeling and movement to parts of the hand.  It is formed in a network of nerves originating from the neck called the brachial plexus.  It then continues down the arm to enter the forearm with the brachial artery.  The median nerve is the only nerve that passes through the carpal tunnel.  Carpal tunnel syndrome is the disability that results from the median nerve being compressed in the carpal tunnel.
Mesenteric Angina -  Central abdominal pain, usually colicky (intermittent spasmodic), that frequently occurs half- one hour following eating.  Often associated with nausea but not vomiting.  May be sufficiently severe that patients are afraid to eat and lose weight rapidly.  May be associated with malabsorption and diarrhoea.
Moderate Obesity -  Moderate obesity refers to individuals who are 30-50% above their ideal body weight, ie with a BMI in the range 30-39.9.
Morbid Obesity -  Morbid obesity refers to individuals who are 50 - 100% above their ideal body weight, ie with a BMI in the range 40-49.9.
MRSA -  Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus.  Often known as multi-resistant Staphylococcus Aureus.  This is usually a hospital-acquired infection as organisms in hospital develop resistance to the common antibiotics.  MRSA is not a virulent organism, but it is dangerous as it is difficult to eliminate.  It tends to cause delayed wound healing and may become impossible to eradicate if it involves a prosthetic material such as an artificial hip or a vascular graft.  It is particularly dangerous if it involves a vascular graft or a heart valve.
Multiple myeloma -  Also known as plasmacytoma is a malignant plasma cell tumour, which cannot be cured but responds to treatment with steroids and chemotherapy. It is associated with changes in the blood including high blood viscosities and abnormal circulating plasma. There are typical lytic lesions in the bones on X-ray. Even with treatment, 5-year survival is just under 50%.
Mycotic aneurysm -  Although ‘mycosis’ directly refers to fungal infection, the term ‘mycotic aneurysm’ is more usually used to describe an aneurysm due to bacterial infection of the aortic wall.  This is frequently iatrogenic (caused by treatment) following the insertion of a needle or cannula into an artery with the small haematoma that forms outside the artery becoming infected.  Another relatively frequent example is when drug addicts attempting to ‘main line’ accidentally puncture the femoral artery in the groin introducing infection.  Mycotic aneurysms of the aorta are frequently due to salmonella aortitis although existing AAAs may become infected due to bacteria settling in thrombus in the AAA lumen during a bacteraemia.
Myocardial Infarction (MI) -  Describes infarction of an area of muscle within the heart due to ischaemia.  This most frequently involves the left heart which is the muscular component of the heart, generating high arterial pressure.  MI is the most frequent cause of death throughout the Western world, particularly in men.  The most frequent cause is thrombosis on atherosclerotic coronary arteries (the arteries that supply the heart) or embolism from atherosclerotic disease.  The effect is to impair the muscle function of the heart, but occasionally it causes an arrhythmia which may be fatal.  Myocardial infarction is also known as “a coronary” or “a heart attack”.
Necrosis -  Necrosis described the death of tissue from whatever cause.  Frequently this is due to an impaired blood supply although pressure, infection and trauma are other common causes.  (See infarction.)
Necrotising fasciitis (synergistic gangrene) -  This describes an aggressive infection which tracks along fascial planes causing thrombosis of the blood supply to the overlying skin with tissue necrosis.  It almost always involves the synergistic infection of two gram-negative organisms, one anaerobic.  The features are of a high temperature causing toxicity in the patient with rapidly spreading cellulitis followed by tissue necrosis.  If not treated early and aggressively by intravenous antibiotics and surgery to debride necrotic tissue and reduce pressure, this spreading infection may result in amputation, major tissue loss and not infrequently may be fatal.
Neuropathy (peripheral neuropathy) -  Although occasionally neuropathies may develop due to viral infection or autoimmune disease, peripheral neuropathy is frequently caused by diabetes. It is thought for diabetic small artery disease impairs profusion of the peripheral nerves such that sensation is lost in the toes and foot. As the patient is unaware of abnormal pressure or tissue injury, the consequence may be diabetic foot ulceration or even tissue necrosis similar to pressure sores.
Neuropraxia -  Describes a nerve injury that does not involve complete division or resection of the relevant nerve.  Most frequently, this term describes peripheral nerve dysfunction following trauma with bruising of the nerve.  It may be seen in surgery following the prolonged application of a retractor to a nerve.  Most patients with neuropraxia achieve complete or near complete recovery of nerve function within weeks or months.
Nifedipine -  Nifedipine is a drug used most commonly to reduce high blood pressure and reduce angina.  Nifedipine can also be used to treat Raynaud’s phenomenon.  It works by relaxing the blood vessels to increase their diameter thereby lowering blood pressure and increasing the flow of blood to the extremities.
Novel anticoagulants -  These are a new generation of anticoagulants that can be given as an alternative to warfarin. They are given orally and do not require that blood is taken regularly to test the adequacy of anticoagulation. It is likely that they will be the principal form of oral anticoagulants used in the future.
Obesity -  Obesity refers to individuals who are more than 30% above their ideal body weight with a body mass index (BMI) over 30.  Gross obesity refers to those with a BMI over 35 and morbid obesity when the BMI is over 40.
Oedema -  This simply describes swelling of the tissues due to excessive fluid.  Typically, this occurs in the legs due to high vein pressures or heart failure.  When unilateral, this suggests venous or lymphatic disease in the relevant limb.
Oral anticoagulation -  This is an oral therapy to reduce the tendency of blood to coagulate.  Anticoagulation, commonly (inaccurately referred to as thinning of the blood) may be achieved by a heparin, given (intravenously or subcutaneously) or by oral drugs such as warfarin.  The dose of warfarin required to achieve oral anticoagulation varies from individual to individual and is controlled by measuring the anticoagulant effect (see also ‘novel anticoagulants’).
Osteomyelitis -  Describes an infection involving the bone.  This can be treated medically unless dead bone (a sequestrum) is present within the infected bone.  Under these circumstances, all the dead bone and infected material needs to be cleaned out at surgery (debrided) with intensive antibiotic therapy if there is to be any prospect of cure.  Chronic osteomyelitis is usually not curable and requires major surgery, often amputation.
Pancreatitis -  An inflammation of the pancreas that typically causes severe upper abdominal pain radiating into the back associated with repeated retching or vomiting.  This condition may be fatal.
Paradoxical Embolism -  This is a term to describe the embolism of venous thrombus into the arterial circulation.  This should not be able to occur with normal cardiac and pulmonary anatomy and venous thrombi would pass as emboli into the lungs (pulmonary emboli).  Small venous thrombi are harmlessly filtered by the lungs which have the ability to dissolve venous clots (thrombolytic capacity).   Harmless venous emboli that would not normally cause pulmonary symptoms may cause devastating symptoms in the arterial circulation, particularly if an embolisation occurs onto the cerebral circulation.  
Paraesthesia -  This is an abnormal sensation experienced by the patient typically it is a tingling or prickling sensation although it can be described as ‘pins and needles’. It is caused chiefly by pressure or damage to peripheral nerves.    
Patch angioplasty -  Vascular Surgeons frequently add a patch that may be taken from the long saphenous vein but is often Dacron (a strong fabric) which is cut as a narrow strip or oval usually with squared ends and sutured into an artery narrowed by arterial disease to increase the circumference and, therefore, the lumen of the artery.  Patches are almost always used when closing the carotid artery following carotid endarterectomy to prevent the artery narrowing as each suture to close an arteriotomy inevitably takes 2-3mms of tissue on each side potentially removing 5-6mms from the circumference.
Patent Foramen Ovale (PFO) -  The foramen ovale is a normal communication between the right and left atria of the heart in embryos.  The embryo is surrounded by amniotic fluid and is unable to breath.  Oxygen is delivered via the placenta with oxygenated blood returned via the umbilical vein and inferior vena cava to the right heart.  This oxygenated blood then passes through a patent foramen ovale into the left atrium from which it is pumped through the arteries of the body to supply the needs of the body’s tissues.  The foramen ovale has a flap valve on the left side of the foramen which closes on birth when the left heart pressures rise.  This closure usually seals leaving no defect but in 25-28% of healthy people there is still a patent foramen ovale which would allow venous blood to pass into the left heart.
Pelvic vein incompetence -  Occurs in 7% of women and is a frequent cause of recurrent varicose veins. Also thought to cause ‘pelvic congestion syndrome’ which is a feeling of heaviness, aching and discomfort in the lower abdomen and upper thighs, worse during menstruation and on standing for long periods.  Usually, incompetence involves either the left ovarian vein or one or both of the internal iliac veins.  Can be treated by transvenous coil occlusion of these veins using a catheter introduced from the right internal jugular vein in the neck.     
Perfusion -  The adequacy of the circulation to any tissue may be described as the perfusion of that tissue.  Inadequate tissue perfusion will result in symptoms.  When the perfusion is inadequate at rest the result is ischaemia.  Tissue perfusion may be impaired by disease of the proximal arteries, thrombosis in the proximal arteries, embolisation into the arteries supplying that tissue, pressure within a hernia or in compartment syndrome and occasionally by severe venous obstruction.
Pericardium -  The sac that surrounds the heart.
Peripheral Neuropathy -  This describes any condition involving the peripheral nerves that affect their function.  This condition is most frequently seen in diabetes when it tends to effect sensation in the feet.  As a result, increased pressure and soft tissue damage can occur without the patient realising.  Classically this results in deep ulcers over bony high-points on the foot.  This condition is aggravated by diabetic small artery disease which is thought to impair the blood supply to the peripheral nerves and which also makes ulceration more likely in the foot.  The impaired circulation due to peripheral artery disease inhibits healing of these ulcers which frequently progress or remain chronic.
Peroneal Nerve (lateral popliteal nerve) -  The common peroneal nerve is a branch of the sciatic nerve in the popliteal fossa behind the knee.  It passes laterally around the neck of the fibula where it divides into the superficial peroneal nerve that supplies sensation over the anterior calf and foot.  The deep peroneal nerve enters the anterior compartment to become the anterior tibial nerve adjacent to the anterior tibial artery.  This nerve is frequently compressed in anterior compartment syndrome resulting in loss of dorsiflexion of the foot and ankle (foot drop).
Phantom Limb Pain -  A pain, often severe, experienced in the amputated part of a limb.  Most frequently experienced in the leg where a severe sharp or burning pain may be felt to involve the toes or foot of a leg that has been amputated.  This pain is notoriously difficult to treat.  The severity of the pain is known to relate to the duration of the pain in that limb prior to amputation.
Platelet inhibitory therapy -  This is given as routine for any patient with atherosclerotic disease, as it is thought that platelets are important in initiating arterial thrombosis of the type that forms in diseased arteries. Aspirin was the first widely-used platelet-inhibitor but subsequently Dipyridamole and then Clopidogrel were introduced, amongst others. When prosthetic grafts or stents are introduced into the arterial circulation, dual platelet inhibitory therapy with both aspirin and Clopidogrel is now routine. Newer and more powerful platelet inhibitory agents such as Prasugrel may also be prescribed despite an increased risk of bleeding.
Pleural cavity - Space, lined by pleura that surrounds the lungs within the thoracic cavity.
Pleuritic Chest Pain -  Typically, this presents with severe sharp or stabbing pain on inspiration which causes shallow breathing.  It is due to inflammation of the membrane covering the lung (the pleura) which then “rubs” the pleura covering the lining of the chest where pain can be appreciated.  Typically, pleuritic chest pain occurs following pulmonary embolism where there is infarction of the lung and is caused by pneumonia.  The patient may appear a little as though they have fractured a lower rib.
Popliteal Artery -  The artery behind the knee that passes through the popliteal fossa between the adductor canal in the thigh and the soleal arch in the upper calf.  It is mainly an artery conducting blood from the superficial femoral artery in the thigh to the calf arteries, but there are supra and infrageniculate arteries that may act as collateral.  May be injured in supracondylar fractures of the femur.  Popliteal artery aneurysm may develop in older men.
Popliteal Vein -  The vein behind the knee that passes through the popliteal fossa between the calf veins, the superficial femoral vein and the thigh.
Posterior Tibial Nerve (Medial Popliteal Nerve) -  This is a branch of the sciatic nerve which passes through the popliteal fossa to supply the posterior calf and the sole of the foot.  The sural nerve arises from the popliteal nerve high in the popliteal fossa and passes into the posterior calf adjacent to the short saphenous vein.  The posterior tibial nerve supplies motor fibres to the calf muscles and sensation to the posterior calf and sole of the foot.
Post Phlebitic Limb - Also known as post-phlebitic syndrome, describes the clinical feature of venous insufficiency. Theses clinical features may occur without a previous history of deep vein thrombosis, but when they occur following deep vein thrombosis the term is applied.  Typical symptoms of venous insufficiency are aching on standing, swelling towards the end of the day, brown pigmentation of the skin around the ankle and lower leg, episodes of inflammation known as phlebitis and ultimately a risk of venous ulceration.  Previous DVT damages venous function by causing fibrosis (scarring) of the deep vein and incompetence of the delicate deep vein valves.  Obstruction is a feature early following DVT but is an unusual long-term feature.  
Postural Hypotension -  This is where the blood pressure is low on standing or getting up from lying down (particularly in the morning).  The cause is hardening of the arteries due to arterial disease which prevents the blood vessels from contracting when the patient stands up which would normally return extra blood to the heart and maintain a more normal blood pressure.
Pressure sore -  A pressure sore or ulcer develops when tissue is compressed to a degree that circulation ceases causing ischaemia and tissue necrosis.  This may occur as an acute event, such as when an unconscious person lies for a prolonged period such that the weight of the body on a bone (example the hip, sacrum) squeezes the soft tissue between that bone and the floor causing necrosis.  More frequently repeated pressure and relief of pressure while in bed causes inflammation due to ischaemia-reperfusion resulting in tissue necrosis.  Most frequently this occurs over the sacrum in patients lying in bed.  It is more likely to occur on the feet in patients where tissue perfusion is already impaired by arterial disease.
Prothrombin time (Pt) - A test of blood coagulation that is used to detect the decrease in the coagulability of blood, most frequently due to the prescription of an oral anticoagulant.  A normal controlled prothrombin time would typically be 11-13 seconds and a prothrombin time on therapeutic doses of Warfarin perhaps 30-42 seconds (INR 0.5-3.5, see above).  
Prothrombotic State - Although a thrombophilia or increased tendency to thrombosis might be considered “prothrombotic” the term prothrombotic state usually refers to an acquired condition leading to arterial or venous thrombosis.  Prothrombotic states may be associated with heavy smoking or advanced cancer, particularly with widespread metastases.  However, activation of the inflammatory cells in the blood and platelets by inflammation, infection or sepsis are well recognised to create a prothrombotic state where spontaneous arterial or venous thrombosis may occur.  Most arterial thromboses develop on atherosclerotic disease which might not otherwise be symptomatic, although arterial thrombus may also develop on the wall of an artery adjacent to an acute inflammation such as an abscess.  The most severe forms of prothrombosis are known as disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), which is usually associated with septicaemia (a bacterial infection of blood itself) or severe trauma.
Pneumothorax - Describes air in the pleura between the lung and the chest wall. This frequently occurs spontaneously when a small air cavity or bulla in the lung bursts so that air can escape from the airways in the lung into the pleural cavity. Pneumothorax is also common following trauma where a fractured rib punctures the lung. It is suspected on clinical examination, confirmed by chest x-ray and treated by insertion of a chest drain or by needle aspiration of the air. When a valve-like tear in the surface of the lung allows air into the pleural cavity but not back into the lung airways, a tension pneumothorax may develop compressing the lungs and heart. Without prompt treatment a tension pneumothorax may be rapidly fatal.
Pseudoaneurysm (false aneurysm) -  This is defined as a collection of blood in communication with an arterial lumen contained within a capsule of compressed surrounding tissue.  Pseudo-aneurysms are usually the result of an arterial injury leading to bleeding into surrounding tissue but where the surrounding tissue are able to contain that haemorrhage so that there is a local haematoma with a jet of blood from the artery pulsating into and out of the haematoma. Usually pseudo-aneurysms progressively increase in size, but occasionally they are contained and become chronic over many months or years.  An acute pseudo-aneurysm more frequently progresses causing pressure damage to surrounding tissues and leading to recurrent haemorrhage.  Pseudo-aneurysms may be caused by arterial injury, arterial puncture such as in cardiac catheterisation or for arteriography or may develop as a result of injection eroding the arterial wall.
Pulmonary Embolus (PE) -  An embolus is when solid material, usually a blood clot or thrombus, passes from one location in the circulation to lodge obstructing an artery or vein elsewhere in the circulation.  When a DVT dislodges from the leg or pelvic veins (see above) it will normally pass up the vena cava, through the right heart and embolise into the lungs as a PE/small emboli may remain asymptomatic, larger emboli would typically cause an acute onset of breathlessness with pleuritic chest pain and occasionally haemoptysis (coughing up blood).  Massive PE may be fatal in only a few minutes as the output of the right heart is obstructed by occlusion of the pulmonary artery or its major branch.
Radial artery -  This is a lateral branch of the brachial artery at the elbow which supplies the forearm muscles and then passes into the hand at the wrist where pulses are normally palpated by doctors and nurses.  As the forearm is also supplied by an ulna artery, it is possible to remove the radial artery for coronary artery bypassing or other purposes without impairing the blood supply to the hand or forearm.  Occasionally a free skin flap can be taken supplied by the underlying radial artery and vein and used to cover soft tissue loss elsewhere with the radial artery and vein anastomosed to adjacent arteries and veins.
Radicular vein -  This refers to a single superficial incompetent vein from a small perforator.  The appearance is similar to thread veins, but there is an underlying venous incompetence.  On occasion radicular veins may cause venous flares (where there are several veins spreading out from the source of incompetence, resembling a fan.
Raynaud’s phenomenon - This describes vaso-spastic symptoms most frequently seen in the hands.  On exposure to the cold, or following other stimuli, there is intense vaso-spasm in the small arteries supplying one or more fingers causing blanching of the tip or even the whole finger.  This is usually painful.  On recovery there is tingling and classically cyanosis (blue discolouration) followed by redness due to hyperperfusion.  Raynaud’s phenomenon may be caused by vasculitis associated with auto-aggressive disorders such as scleroderma, or may be due to thoracic outlet syndrome where the subclavian artery is irritated as it leaves the thoracic cavity to enter the arm.
Recurrent laryngeal nerve - The recurrent laryngeal nerve supplies the cricoarytenoid muscles which open the vocal cords.  On both sides of the neck fibres that will become the recurrent laryngeal nerve pass down in the anterior compartment of the vagus nerve.  On the right side, the recurrent laryngeal nerve loops around the subclavian artery, returns to the neck in the tracheo-oesophageal groove and enters the voicebox from its lower aspect through the pharyngeal muscles.  On the left side, the recurrent laryngeal nerve arises from the vagus in the chest, loops around the aortic arch returning to the neck in the tracheo-oesophageal groove to again enter the voicebox from its inferior aspect.
Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy -  A shutting down of the microcirculation due to immobility, often caused by paralysis or limb injury. The circulation to the distal limb is stimulated by activity and the microcirculation develops as a result.  The reverse occurs with sustained immobility as the microcirculation “shuts down” causing coldness and cyanosis with discomfort.  The long-term prognosis is good if normal function can be restored to the limb.
Renal artery - A branch of the aorta supplying the kidney.
Renal vein - The vein that drains the blood from the kidney to the vena cava.  The left renal vein is longer than the right and usually lies anterior to the aorta.  This left renal vein may need to be ligated in aortic aneurysm surgery.
Retinopathy - This describes the changes seen in the small blood vessels of the retina in diabetics.  Diabetic retinopathy is associated with an increased risk of peripheral neuropathy, diabetic foot ulceration, arterial disease and premature morbidity in diabetics.
Rhabdomyolysis - Describes the breakdown of muscle with the excretion of myoglobin in the urine.  The urine becomes dark red-brown and may have the appearances that there was bleeding.  When the urine is acid, myoglobin releases nephrotoxic substances causing renal failure.  The treatment is to give large volumes of intravenous fluid to maintain blood volume and a high urine output.  It helps to alkalinise the urine, which prevents nephrotoxicity.
Sepsis – Describes a bacterial infection associated with an inflammatory reaction. It should be distinguished from sepsis syndrome, which is a severe inflammatory reaction that may be caused by a number of serious illnesses. Typically, a bacterial infection and sepsis causes fever, rigors or shaking episodes associated with chills, malaise and a high white cell count and C-reactive protein CRP. Blood culture may indicate bacteraemia - bacteria in the blood stream - or septicaemia - bacteria multiplying in the blood stream usually caused severe sepsis). 
Sigmoid colon - The large bowel immediately above - proximal - to the rectum at the bottom of the descending colon.  This bowel contains faecal material teeming with micro-organisms that would potentially cause severe infection if introduced to the body’s tissues.
Sigmoid mesentery - The mesentery is a sheet of tissue containing the blood supply to the bowel.  The remaining tissue consists only of membranes and fat that can be easily penetrated during surgery.  The sigmoid mesentery arises from the midline near the aorta and may be part of the retro-peritoneum before passing forward into the peritoneum to supply the sigmoid colon -  Retro-peritoneal tissues behind the peritoneal cavity include the aorta, the iliac vessels, the kidneys, the ureter and loose tissues through which vascular grafts can be passed from the aorta to the iliac or femoral arteries.
Small artery disease -  Arterial disease involving the microcirculation, usually of the foot but occasionally of the hands.  Typically seen in diabetes causing gangrene of the toes.  This process is involved in neuropathic ulcers of the foot which are more likely to occur when the circulation is impaired.  These ulcers frequently become chronic due to impaired circulation and the increased susceptibility to infections seen in diabetics.
Spleen -  A vascular organ in the left abdomen under the diaphragm that is easily fractured leading to bleeding and rupture.  The spleen had immunological functions as it is involved in the production of antibodies and specific lymphocytes required to fight infections.  It also has a role in re-educating circulating immune cells and platelets.
Stenosis -  A narrowing of a hollow tube or viscous.  Typically used to describe narrowing of an artery due to atherosclerotic disease sufficient to influence blood flow.
Stent graft -  This describes a stent (a collapsible wire mesh tube usually used to hold an artery open) on which a fabric graft has been mounted to contain arterial flow within its lumen. Stent-grafts are used as a minimally invasive way to repair abdominal aortic aneurysm, thoracic aortic aneurysm and injuries to arteries including the aorta. The stent-graft is usually inserted by making an incision(s) over the common femoral artery(ies)  in the groin(s) and is deployed into the aorta using a large catheter. Arterial injuries and thoracic aortic aneurysms are usually repaired using simple tubes whereas an abdominal aortic aneurysm requires a bifurcated stent-graft with the main body inserted from one common femoral artery (usually the right) and then inserted into a side-arm in the main body using the other common femoral artery.
Stenting -  This refers to the insertion of a stent to maintain the luminal diameter of a hollow viscous or blood vessel.  In vascular disease, a tubular metal alloy mesh may be mounted on an angioplasty balloon catheter (see above) and be expanded against the inner lining of a narrowed artery or vein during angioplasty.  When the balloon is deflated, the metal mesh remains within what had been the narrowing to maintain the diameter of the newly fashioned artery or vein.  Stents may precipitate a re-narrowing through the formation of pseudo-intima (thickened tissue inside the stent).
Strangulation - This is a process by which a loop of bowel passes through a hernia ring or defect and then becomes stuck in that position (irreducible).  The bowel usually becomes obstructed, but the process of strangulation is where the loop starts to swell causing the hernia ring to become a constriction which then creates a vicious cycle of further swelling and tightening of the constriction.  Ultimately the venous flow of blood is obstructed sufficiently to stop perfusion of the loop of bowel which necroses and becomes gangrenous.  This is a rapidly progressive phenomenon, causing severe pain, toxic shock and requiring emergency surgery.
Stroke -  This is defined as a sudden neurological deficit presumed to be of vascular cause.  Most frequently, the patient suffers paralysis or partial paralysis of one side of the body which may be associated with loss of speech, slurred speech, visual disturbances or abnormal cognitive function.  Stroke is most frequently caused by cerebral ischaemia but approximately 25% of strokes are due to haemorrhage into the brain (cerebral haemorrhage).
Subarachnoid haemorrhage - This is bleeding into the subarachnoid space (the area between the arachnoid membrane and the PMR surround the brain). It often occurs spontaneously usually from a ruptured cerebral aneurysm or may result from a head injury. 
Subclavian artery - The subclavian arteries supply the arms and arise on the right from the brachio-cephalic artery and on the left from the aorta.  They pass from the thorax over the first rib to become the axillary artery and then the brachial artery in the upper arm.  Atherosclerotic disease frequently affects the origin of the subclavian artery.  The subclavian artery may be compressed and irritated as it passes over the first rib when there is insufficient space in the thoracic outlet for its free passage.  This irritation of the subclavian artery occurs in thoracic outlet syndrome.
Subclavian vein - This is the most proximal vein draining venous blood from the arms.  It is a continuation of the axillary vein which becomes the subclavian vein as it passes over the first rib to enter the thorax.  In patients with thoracic outlet syndrome, the vein may be nipped between the first rib, the clavicle and scelenus anterior muscle or over a cervical rib if this abnormality exists.  This may cause subclavian vein thrombosis which occasionally occurs spontaneously in young adults.  It drains directly into the vena cava on the right but joins the internal jugular vein to form the brachio-cephalic on the left.
Subdural haematoma - Is when bleeding occurs from the surface of the brain, usually due to a head injury, frequently not severe. Typically, the patient develops headaches days or weeks following trauma that may not have been sufficiently severe to justify treatment at the time. The haematoma is thought to be due to venous bleeding with symptoms caused as proteins in the haematoma breakdown sucking fluid into it so that it progressively expands over time pressing on the underlying brain and potentially causing cerebral infarction and stroke.
Superficial thrombophlebitis - This describes thrombosis involving a superficial vein, usually occurring following minor trauma to varicose veins in the leg.  May also occur frequently following an intravenous infusion where the involved vein becomes inflamed and suffers thrombosis.  The thrombosis created firm subcutaneous lumps which are very tender, red and inflamed in the first instance, creating the impression that there may be an infection which is usually treated by GPs using antibiotics.  Compression and Aspirin therapy is all that is required.  Superficial thrombophlebitis settles over a period of 3-6 weeks depending on its severity.  The vein will usually recanalise.  
Superficial veins - These are veins under the skin but superficial to the deep fascia.  They may be invisible, but more frequently can be seen as blue lines under the skin or linear bulges.  They are obvious over the back of a hand or foot.  Valve failure (incompetence) within superficial veins is the usual cause of varicose veins.
Superior Mesenteric Artery -  A large artery arising from the anterior aorta between the coeliac axis and the renal arteries which supplies the small bowel and at least the right side of the large bowel (colon).  There are excellent collateral communications with the coeliac axis above and the inferior mesenteric and internal iliac arteries below.
Superior vena cava - This is the major vein draining the blood from the upper body into the right atrium.  It is 2-3cms in diameter and may suffer thrombosis or stenosis due to cannulation of the subclavian or internal jugular vein, or due to compression or invasion of tumour in the upper mediastinum.  SVC obstruction causes swelling and cyanosis of the head, neck, upper chest and upper limbs.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) -  This is an auto aggressive disorder (connective tissue disease) which is typically associated with joint pains, stiffness, muscle pains, fatigue and a wide range of other systemic symptoms.  It is an inflammatory condition that results in an elevated ESR and C-reactive protein.  It may be associated with a wide range of conditions including a vasculitis typically affecting small arteries and an increased tendency to thrombosis (usually when lupus anticoagulant can be detected.
Tamponade -  Compression of an organ by fluid or air.  Typically used as cardiac tamponade when fluid or bleeding into the pericardium compresses the heart causing cardiac failure and often resulting in death.
TED stockings -  These are low-compression elastic stockings, usually worn full-length but more recently below the knee, for deep vein thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis. The pressures exerted by the stockings at the ankle are approximately 10-15mmHg; a low pressure. As patients who use the stockings in hospital are usually lying or sitting, the stockings work to push blood upwards through the veins. They have been shown to reduce the frequency of (DVT) following general and orthopaedic surgery, but not following stroke. The toe is covered by a flap of fabric that is not elasticated, which exerts no pressure on the toes and which can be pulled open so that the nurses can inspect the toes from time to time.
Thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA) - An aortic aneurysm involving the thoracic aorta.
Thoracic endovascular aneurysm repair (TEVAR) -  This describes the repair of a TAA using a stent graft inserted via cannulation of the common femoral arteries in the groin.  Usually a bare stent (with no fabric) extends above the left renal artery with the covered stent starting below the left renal artery.  The distal end of a tube graft is usually inserted in the distal thoracic aorta, but in thoracoabdominal aneurysms a complex fenestrated or branch graft arrangement may be required around the visceral vessels.  There is a significant (>10%) risk of paraplegia due to excluding the lower thoracic intercostal arteries that supply the spinal cord.
Thoracic outlet syndrome -  This describes arm symptoms that develop due to compression of the subclavian artery or vein or brachial plexus as they pass over the first rib to enter the axilla.  This compression may be due to abnormal anatomy which occasionally involves a cervical rib (an extra rib arising from the 7th cervical vertebra). The typical vascular symptoms of thoracic outlet syndrome include Raynaud’s phenomenon, usually unilateral. There is a risk of injury to the subclavian artery leading to subclavian aneurysm with luminal thrombus which embolises into the distal circulation and may result in severe ischaemia and even amputation of the hand or arm.
Thoracoabdominal aneurysm -  A thoracic aneurysm that extends to involve the abdominal aorta and often involves the origin of the visceral vessels.  Repair involves very major surgery through a thoracoabdominal incision with cardiopulmonary bypass or, at least, left heart bypass.  Repair carries a risk of mortality in the range 15-20% and a risk of paraplegia in the range 10-15% unless the patient is young and fit.
Thorascopic Sympathectomy -  A surgical procedure where the autonomic nerves to the arm are divided within the chest cavity. Under general anaesthetic 2 ports are inserted through the chest wall and the lung is deflated. The nerves can be seen on the posterior chest wall as a chain. These are divided at the appropriate level, usually T2 or T3. The lung is reinflated and the ports removed. The main risks of this procedure include bleeding, which may be catastrophic and life threatening, Horner’s syndrome, pneumothorax- which may require a chest drain and compensatory sweating.
Thread Veins - An area of small veins, usually tortuous, just underneath the skin.  These are visible and thought to be a cosmetic problem by many women.  They are extremely common in women of childbearing age.  They possibly relate to the hormone status of a woman.  They are more obvious in patients with venous incompetence (such as varicose veins).
Thromboangiitis Obliterans - Commonly known as Buerger’s Disease, this is an aggressive small vessel artery disease in men, related to heavy cigarette smoking.  Occasionally we do see women with an identical condition and although Buerger described this disease in men only, I suspect it occurs in both sexes. The remarkable feature of these patients is that they appear unable to stop smoking even though the condition stops deteriorating if they do. Typically, this is a cause of ischaemic ulceration and gangrene involving the toes and feet of young adults aged 30-40.  If they cannot stop smoking there is relentless deterioration leading to below-knee and sometimes above-knee amputation.
Thrombolysis - This is where a thrombus or blood clot is dissolved using naturally occurring substances that cause the breakdown of thrombus.  The two most common agents used are streptokinase and, more recently, tissue plasminogen activator (TPA).  Both these agents increase the risk of bleeding, which may serious such as cerebral haemorrhage causing stroke.  Streptokinase may cause an allergic reaction.  Thrombolysis tends to be effective in recent thrombus and is rarely effective when a thrombus has been present for more than one month.  It is highly effective at clearing large vessels, but largely ineffective in small vessels in the foot or hand.  The thrombolytic agent must be administered into the bloodstream or using a catheter directly into the thrombus.
Thrombophilia - Thrombophilias can be defined as a group of inherited or acquired disorders that increase a person’s risk of developing thrombosis (abnormal ‘blood clotting’) in the veins or arteries.
Thrombophilia screen -  This describes a number of haematological tests to detect an increased tendency to either venous or arterial thrombosis.
Thrombosis - Thrombosis describes the process in which blood clots or forms a thrombus within arteries or veins.  Arterial thrombosis is usually firm white material derived predominately from blood cells such as platelets with adherent fibrin.  Venous thrombosis is frequently nothing other than soft clotted blood due to venous stasis or injury to the vein wall.  A thrombus that detaches from the artery or vein may then move in the blood circulation and is described as an embolus.
Thrombosis of the lateral thoracic vein -  This is relatively rare and thought to be associated with inflammatory conditions of the breast. Sometimes called Mondor’s disease.
Tinel’s test - Performed by tapping the median nerve along its course in the wrist. A positive test is found when this causes worsening of the tingling in the fingers when the nerve is tapped and is suggestive of nerve compression (carpal tunnel syndrome). 
Troponin-T - This is a biomarker that is specific for myocardial muscle injury.  Elevation of the Troponin-T is considered diagnostic of myocardial infarction or other causes of myocardial muscle injury.
Type I diabetes -  Develops in childhood and almost invariably requires insulin therapy.  Quality of life and life expectancy heavily depend of the quality of diabetic control and maintaining stable, reasonably low blood glucose levels.  Diabetics small artery disease with retinopathy, nephropathy and peripheral neuropathy becomes inevitable in young or mid adult life with few type I diabetics achieving the age of 50.  Diabetic control may be substantially improved by pancreatic transplantation (sometimes combined with renal transplantation) and implantable insulin pumps are being developed.  The combination of peripheral neuropathy with small artery disease renders these patients prone to foot ulceration in mid life and major limb amputation in the age range 40-55 years.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus -  Type 2 diabetes mellitus consists of an array of dysfunctions characterized by hyperglycemia and resulting from the combination of resistance to insulin action, inadequate insulin secretion, and excessive or inappropriate glucagon secretion. Poorly controlled type 2 diabetes is associated with an array of microvascular, macrovascular, and neuropathic complications. Microvascular complications of diabetes include retinal, renal, and possibly neuropathic disease. Macrovascular complications include coronary artery and peripheral vascular disease. Diabetic neuropathy affects autonomic and peripheral nerves.
Valvular incompetence -  Describes the scarring of the valves following deep vein thrombosis resulting in a loss of competence.  This allows blood to reflux back down the superficial or deep veins while walking.
Varicose veins -  Are tortuous dilated and usually thin walled veins, predominantly affecting the superficial veins of the lower legs.  They occur due to reflux of blood caused by incompetence of the venous valves between the deep veins and the superficial veins of the legs.  Deep venous blood pumped up the leg by the calf muscle pump refluxes down the superficial veins where the flow is turbulent.  As a result of this high turbulent flow the vein dilates in a tortuous and erratic fashion.  Many patients find varicose veins cosmetically unacceptable.  Symptoms include itching, heavy legs and aching which in more severe cases may be associated with swelling of the lower leg.
Vascular Dementia - A deterioration in cognitive function typified by a loss of recent memory assumed to be caused by vascular disease.  Typically, patients with vascular dementia have a history of transient cerebral ischaemia or stroke. Multiple cerebral infarcts are frequently seen on CT examination.
Vasculitis - Vasculitis describes inflammation of arteries or veins.  In practice, this nearly always involves small blood vessels forming the micro-circulation.  The inflammatory process is commonly associated with an underlying auto-aggressive or collagen disorder such as rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma or systemic lupus erythematosis.  Typically, there are auto-antibodies associated with these diseases that can be diagnosed by blood analysis.  Vasculitis may cause thickening of the arterial walls in small blood vessels leading to narrowing of these arteries.  Alternatively, there may be thrombosis within the lumen of narrowed arteries resulting in occlusion and ischaemia of distal tissues.  Vasculitis is often associated with Reynaud’s Phenomenon which describes symptoms due to vasospasm in the small arteries supplying the fingers or toes.
Vasospasm - Contracture of the microcirculation reducing perfusion to tissues.  Typically, the symptoms include pallor, tingling and numbness.  Vasospasm may be followed by reactive hyperaemia with cyanosis and then redness (Reynaud’s phenomenon).
Vein Bypass - This is where a vein, usually the long saphenous vein from the leg, is used to bypass a blocked artery.  Most frequently this is the superficial femoral artery in the thigh when it is occluded by atherosclerosis.  Vein bypasses are also used following traumatic division or thrombosis of any artery of the appropriate size.  Typically, the vein is reversed so that the valves do not inhibit flow although with in-situ bypasses the vein may be left in its bed and the valves everted using an intra-lumenal instrument.  Vein is the optimal material for bypass (as opposed to a prosthetic) but there is a risk of vein graft stenosis, occlusion by thrombosis and of atherosclerosis developing within the vein graft over many years.
Veins - Veins are thin-walled blood vessels which conduct deoxygenated blood from the body’s tissues back to the heart (or oxygenated blood from the lungs back to the left heart).  Venous pressures are generally low and depend entirely on whether the vein is above or below the heart as most blood returns to the heart by gravity alone.  Blood is pumped from the veins in the lower leg by the calf muscle pump.  As the blood flow in the leg veins is slow (static) when the legs are resting there is a risk of deep vein thrombosis.
Venoplasty - This describes the procedure designed to widen a narrowing in a vein.  Open surgical venoplasty usually involves stitching a patch of vein into a narrowed vein.  More usually, this term describes endovascular venoplasty when a catheter is passed through a narrowed or occluded vein and a balloon inflated under pressure to ‘force open’ the narrowed segment.  If necessary a stent is inserted to hold the vein open.  Regrettably, re-thrombosis is common.
Venous Insufficiency - Symptoms and signs in a limb, usually the leg, due to sustained high venous pressures.  These symptoms include a feeling of swelling and tightness in the limb on exercise with swelling of the foot and lower leg towards the end of the day.  This swelling improves or may resolve completely after lying overnight. There is usually aching on standing and skin changes in the lower leg with pigmentation, eczema or even ulceration. This may be caused by previous DVT (see post-phlebitic limb above), by varicose veins, by congenital abnormalities in the veins and by failure of the calf muscle pump due to immobility following paralysis, injury or joint disease.
Venous Matting - A mesh of very fine veins that create a blue discolouration similar to a bruise.  May occur naturally but frequently follow inappropriate treatment for thread veins when there is superficial venous incompetence proximally in the same leg.
Venous Stasis - Describes the slow movement, or absence of movement, of blood within veins.  Arterial flow is driven by the heart and although pulsatile tends to be consistent.  Venous flow in the legs may be absent unless stimulated by the calf muscle pump or by elevation of the leg. When the leg is immobilised, or patients are confined to bed due to injury or illness, the blood flow is sufficiently impaired that clotting may develop in vein valves and may then spread throughout the veins in the absence of adequate venous flow.
Venous to Arterial Circulation Shunt (v-aCS) -  This describes any abnormal communication between the venous and arterial circulation that would allow the passage of emboli or other substances from the vein circulation into the artery circulation without being filtered by the lungs.  By far the most frequent variety of v-aCS is a patent foramen ovale which exists in 25-28% of the adult population.  Paradoxical embolism of venous thrombi into the arterial circulation cannot occur without a v-aCS.
Venous thrombosis - This is a thrombus or clot forming within a vein.  The blood flow in the veins is slow and a deep vein thrombosis (DVT) occurs as a result of three factors; i) increased coagulability of blood, ii) venous stasis allowing blood coagulation and iii) injury to the vein impairing the function of the venous endothelium (the lining of the vein that prevents thrombosis).  Venous thrombosis classically causes swelling of the involved limb or organ, pain and a temperature.  If is venous thrombus detaches it was usually embolise to the lung as a pulmonary embolus (PE) but occasionally it may embolise through a patent foramen ovale in the heart as apparent paradoxical embolism to block a systemic artery causing ischaemia such as stroke.
Venous thromboembolism - This is a collective term to describe DVT or PE (see above) the aetiology of these two conditions is similar and it is normal to refer to the risk factors as risk factors for VTE rather than each condition individually.
Venous Ulcer - A sore on the leg, usually above the ankle on the inner aspect of the lower leg, due to the effects of sustained high vein pressures in venous insufficiency.  Sustained high vein pressures (venous hypertension) maybe caused by primary varicose veins (superficial venous incompetence), acute venous obstruction due to deep vein thrombosis, chronic deep venous insufficiency (usually incompetence of the deep veins) but may also be caused by immobility (failure to use the calf muscle pump), joint disease, paralysis of the leg or even by obesity.
Vertebral artery - Vertebral arteries are arteries that supply the hindbrain and may be dominant arteries to the brain in four-legged animals.  They arise from the subclavian arteries bilaterally and enter the vertebral canals in the transverse processes of the cervical vertebra at C6 passing up into the brain where they join to form the basilar artery. Vertebral artery dissection may cause stroke in the hindbrain, causing dizziness, loss of coordination and loss of balance.
Vertebral artery dissection - A dissection may occur in the vertebral artery either spontaneously or as a result of trauma.  Blood enters the media of the artery, usually from torn vaso vasorum within the artery but sometimes from the lumen of the artery.  The dissection may extend up and down the artery for a variable length and may cause occlusion of the vertebral artery.  Occasionally, haematoma within the artery wall may detach and embolise to the brain causing stroke.  Vertebral dissection usually causes neck pain posteriorly on the relevant side, extending up to the occiput of the head on that side.  Stroke may occur days or weeks following the initial dissection.
Vibration White Finger (VWF) - This describes the appearance of fingers in patients with vascular symptoms associated with the hand-arm vibration syndrome (HAVS).  These are vasospastic symptoms (symptoms caused by spasm in the arteries supplying the fingers) which are typically precipitated by exposure to the cold, handling cold metal objects or exposure to vibrating tools
Volkmann’s Ischaemic Contracture - This describes the long-term consequences of severe ischaemia of the forearm or lower leg muscles.  Occasionally acute ischaemia results in substantial muscle death within the compartments of the forearm or lower leg but with sufficient recovery in the blood supply to the hand and foot that the fingers/toes survive.  Initially it is common for the medical staff and patient to be reassured that the limb will survive.  Unfortunately, extensive necrosis in a muscle is followed by scarring and fibrosis which contracts over the ensuing months.  The result is clawed hand or foot with little useful function and usually a flexion deformity of the wrist or ankle such that the foot cannot be placed flat on the floor.  This is a permanent and severe handicap.
Warfarin - An oral anticoagulant which inhibits the production of clotting factors in the liver.  As there is considerable variation in the dose of Warfarin from patient to patient, this dosage is controlled by taking venous blood samples to measure the INR (see above).  